# Static Rouse Modes and Related Quantities: Corrections to Chain Ideality in Polymer Melts

## 1 Introduction



In 1953 P.E. Rouse [1] proposed a model to describe the dynamics of a polymer chain, which has become an impor- tant concept in polymer physics [2,3]. The Rouse model assumes the chain to be a sequence of Brownian beads. The beads are connected by entropic springs and immersed in a structureless medium which exerts on every bead two forces, a local random force and a local friction force. Both forces are linked by the fluctuation-dissipation theorem to ensure correct equilibrium properties [2].

This bead-spring model thus considers only local inter- actions. Nonlocal interactions, such as hydrodynamic or excluded-volume forces between distant beads along the chain, are ignored. While this assumption is certainly not appropriate for dilute solution in good solvents, it may be valid in concentrated solutions or polymer melts, where both nonlocal interactions are expected to be screened [2, 3]. In particular in polymer melts, the screening is sup- posed to extend down to the monomer level, implying that polymer conformations correspond to those of ideal ran- dom walks. Hence, it is generally believed that the Rouse theory provides, at long times and large length scales, a viable description of the conformational dynamics of poly- mer melts if entanglements with other chains, giving rise to reptation motion [2,3,4], are not important.

Experimental or computational scrutiny of the Rouse model has thus focused on the behavior of short chains in a melt (for review see e.g. [4,5]). These tests reveal that

the Rouse model represents a good approximation, but quantitative agreement is hard to obtain. To explain the observed deviations there are, roughly speaking, two main ideas in the literature: additional intrachain contributions not accounted for by the theory (chain stiffness [6,7, 8], local excluded volume effects [9,10], torsional transitions [11,12, 13]) and multi-chain effects which invalidate the phantom-chain-in-a-structureless-medium approach of the Rouse model [5].

In the present article, we provide further evidence for the latter point of view. However, there is one important respect in which the objective of our discussion is limited. The Rouse model is, in the first place, an attempt to de- scribe dynamic features of polymer melts. Here we shall not be concerned with dynamics, but rather study, by the- ory and simulation, the initial (static) value of the corre- lation function of the Rouse modes. This initial value in- forms us about conformational properties of a chain in the melt, and clearly, an understanding of these equilibrium features is a prerequisite for an extension of the discussion to polymer dynamics. Our key point is that the conforma- tional properties, even for very flexible chains, are more complex than commonly assumed because chains are not phantom chains, free of any interaction. In the melt, poly- mer segments of size s (s >> 1) experience an effective re- pulsion resulting from chain connectivity and incompress- ibility of the melt. This repulsion entails systematic de- viations from 'ideal' random-walk-like conformations and thus leads to a violation of the 'Flory ideality hypothesis'

2

H. Meyer et al .: Static Rouse Modes and Corrections to Chain Ideality in Polymer Melts

[14], i.e. of a central concept of modern polymer physics. The consequences of these deviations have recently been explored in real (intrachain correlations [15, 16]) and recip- rocal space (form factor [17, 18], collective structure factor [19]). The purpose of the present work is to extend this discussion to the static Rouse modes.

The outline of the article is as follows. We begin by pre- senting the simulation models and techniques used in this study (Section 2). Section 3 compares predictions from phantom chain calculations to simulation results of poly- mer melts with full excluded volume interaction between the monomers. The comparison reveals systematic devia- tions between theory and simulation for the static corre- lation function of the Rouse modes. These deviations can be rationalized by a theory which accounts for corrections to chain ideality in polymer melts (Section 4). Section 5 extends the previous discussion to the situation where the phantom chain limit is approached by gradually making the monomer-monomer interaction softer. Also this case can be understood by taking corrections to chain ideality into account. The final section (Section 6) presents a brief synopsis of our results.

## 2 Simulation models and techniques



By computer simulations we examine polymer melts of two coarse-grained models [20], a bead-spring model and the bond fluctuation model. For both models we study a ver- sion which precludes monomer overlap ('hard monomers') and another one with finite energy penalty for monomer overlap ('soft monomers'). The latter version allows us to switch gradually from full monomer excluded volume interactions, the standard choice in simulations, to phan- tom chain behavior, the situation considered by the Rouse model.

In the following we briefly describe the simulation mod- els and techniques. Further details may be found in Refs. [16,21].

## 2.1 Bead-spring model



## 2.1.1 Excluded volume chains



The bead-spring model (BSM) is derived from a model employed in simulations of polymer crystallization [22,23, 24,25]. It is characterized by two potentials: a harmonic bond potential,

Ub (r) =kb (r -lb) 2,

(1) where kb = 535.46 kBT/02 and 1b = 0.9723400, and a nonbonded 9-6 Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential

Unb(r) = 10 JEO ( 9) 9 - (9) 6 | + C r < rmin , r > rmin ,

(2)

with 80 = 1.511kBT. The LJ potential is truncated at its minimum, "min = (3/2)1/3 00, and shifted to zero by

2 a€ E

₸

-

Unb(r)/KBT

- UC (r)/kBT

1

-f

c

c

V

0

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8

(a)

1

energy cost E/8

(b)

Fig. 1. Illustration of the modeling of soft monomers for the BSM [panel (a)] and the BFM [panel (b)]. For the BSM a force capping with parameter fc = 1.781 is shown. This gives Tc = 1.0535 and an energy penalty for monomer overlap of E= Unb(rc)+fcrc = 1.94. For the BFM every doubly occupied lattice site is penalized by an energy cost of E/8 so that the energy penalty for full overlap of two monomers equals E.

C = 480/27. Intrachain and interchain interactions of non- bonded monomers are thus purely repulsive. The param- eters of the bond potential are adjusted such that the av- erage bond length l ~ 1b = 0.9723400 at the monomer density p = 0.8400 is very close to that of the standard Kremer-Grest model [26,27]. In the following, we report all data in reduced units, that is, energies are measured in units of kBT (Boltzmann constant kB = 1) and lengths in units of the monomer diameter 00.

## 2.1.2 From hard to soft monomers



Equations (1) and (2) ensure that chains cannot cross each other and monomers are impenetrable ('hard monomers'). We 'soften' these constraints by introducing a force cap- ping through the following modification of the nonbonded interactions

Un6 (r) = Unb(r) [ Unb (rc) + fc(rc -r) 0<r<rc,

r > rc . (3)

Here the 'capping' distance rc is defined by the condition that the nonbonded force at rc has the prescribed value fc, i.e. - dUnb(r)/dr|r=re = fc. This definition implies that rc tends to 0 for fc > 1 and to Imin for fc > 0. (See Fig. 1(a) for an illustration.) For distances smaller than rc Eq. (3) thus replaces the steep rise of Unb(r) by a much

H. Meyer et al .: Static Rouse Modes and Corrections to Chain Ideality in Polymer Melts

3

weaker linear increase, entailing a finite energy penalty E = Unb(rc) + fcrc for two overlapping monomers (r = 0). The smaller fc, the softer the monomers. In particular, if fc = 0, we recover phantom chain behavior, i.e. Ufc (r) = 0, because rc then equals rmin and Unb(r) vanishes for r ≥ rmin.

In this way, we also simulate two phantom chain mod- els, a (generalized) freely-jointed chain (FJC) model char- acterized only by the bond potential of Eq. (1), and a (generalized) freely-rotating chain (FRC) model which, in addition to Eq. (1), also presents a potential for the bond angle 0, Uang (0) = ke [1- cos 2(0-00)] ,

(4) with ke = 10 and 00 = 109°. For this potential we find that the average cosine of the bond angle is a = (cos 0) = -0.320713 ~ cos00.

## 2.1.3 Simulation aspects



With these models we perform molecular dynamics (MD) simulations at constant temperature T = 1 (Langevin thermostat with friction constant y = 0.5) and constant monomer density p = 0.84, the typical melt density of the Kremer-Grest model [26,27]. The equations of mo- tion are integrated by the Velocity-Verlet algorithm [28]. For 'hard' monomers we combine the MD with double- bridging Monte Carlo (MC) moves [20,27] to speed up the decorrelation of large-scale conformational features. As only few of these MC moves are accepted per unit time, this does not deteriorate the stability or accuracy of the MD. The MC moves, however, considerably improve the statistics for large chain lengths. For 'soft' monomers only MD is used. We will discuss data for chain lengths (number of monomers per chain) N = 64, 256, 512, and 1024, obtained from simulations of periodic systems of lin- ear size L ≤ 62. For p = 0.84 these systems contain up to 196 608 monomers.

## 2.2 Bond fluctuation model



## 2.2.1 Excluded volume chains



We also examine the three-dimensional bond fluctuation model (BFM) on a cubic lattice [29,30]. Each monomer occupies a cube of eight adjacent sites, the length of the bonds between connected monomers along a chain are allowed to fluctuate in the range from 2 to v10 lattice constants (the lattice constant will be the length unit in the following), and double occupancy of lattice sites is forbidden by a hard-core interaction between monomers. The system is athermal, the only control parameter be- ing the monomer density p. Melt conditions are realized for p = 0.5/8, where half of the lattice sites are occupied [30]. We use periodic simulation boxes of linear dimension L = 256 which contain pL3 ~ 106 monomers. These large systems eliminate finite-size effects, even for the longest chain lengths studied (256 ≤ N ≤ 8192). The simulations

are carried out by a mixture of local, slithering-snake, and double-bridging MC moves which allow us to equilibrate polymer melts with chain lengths up to N = 8192 [16].

## 2.2.2 From hard to soft monomers



In analogy to the BSM we also study soft monomers by introducing a finite energy penalty E/8 for a doubly occu- pied lattice site (see Fig. 1). This implies that full overlap between two monomers leads to an energy cost of E (as for the BSM, cf. Section 2.1.2). A local or slithering-snake move, leading to Nov double-occupancies, gives rise to a total energy H/kBT = NovE/8. With the energies of the final (Hf) and initial configurations (Hi) we accept the move according to the Metropolis criterion [20,31] with probability min(1, exp[-(Hf - Hi)/kBT]).

## 3 Rouse model: predictions and observed deviations



The basic variables of the Rouse model are the Rouse modes Xp. Here we introduce two definitions for Xp, de- pending on whether we consider a discrete (simulation) model or a continuous (theoretical) model.

For the discrete case let rn be the position of monomer n (n = 1, ... , N). The Rouse modes are defined by [32]

N

1

Xp = N n=1

> In COS (n-1/2)pm N

(5)

with p = 0, ... , N - 1. In the continuum limit we will use the notation of Ref. [2] and write

Z

Xp = N/ dnr(n) cos прт N (p=0,1,2, ... ). (6)

Here the monomer index n is a continuous variable ranging from 0 to the total number of bonds N.

Our analysis focuses on the static correlation functions of the Rouse modes p and q. In the continuum limit these functions are given by

Cpq = (Xp . Xq)

CN N dm (r(n) · r(m)> cos N

1 dn

npr COS

mqT = N2

0

N

0

1

N N

= dn

dm {[r(n) - r(m)]2) x

− 2N2 0

0

npT

mqT N Cos mar . ( 7 )

COS

In dense melts it is commonly assumed that intrachain and interchain excluded volume interactions compensate each other down to the scale of a monomer [2] so that a mean- field picture should apply. Static equilibrium features can be obtained by treating the polymer liquid as an ensem- ble of independent chains displaying ideal random-walk- like conformations. If this was true, single-chain models,

4

H. Meyer et al .: Static Rouse Modes and Corrections to Chain Ideality in Polymer Melts

p/N

10-4

10-3

10-2

10-1

10º

108

BFM:

107

× :selected: N=256

106

4 :selected: N=1024

2.0

:unselected:

1.8

1.6

:unselected: 0 N=1024 (FJC)

[2(Tp)2/N]Cpp

* N=4096

10º

b2

e

-2

:unselected: N=8192

10 sin(pr/2N)

104

pp

107

103

8NC

102

10º

2 e

b

10°

101

10º

pp‘

104

10-1

8NC

10°

BSM:

102 101

:unselected: o N=64

× :selected: N=256

:unselected:

N=1024

10º

10-1

-4 10-3

10

10-2

10-1

10º

p/N

Fig. 2. Correlation function of the Rouse modes Cpp versus p/N for the BSM (left ordinate) and the BFM (right ordinate). All simulation results shown refer to chains with full excluded volume between the monomers. Following Eq. (8) the ordi- nate is scaled by 8N/b2 (BSM: be = 1.338, BFM: be = 3.244 [16]). The solid lines indicate the predictions of the FJC model Eq. (8)].

i.e. phantom chains, should suffice to fully describe chain conformations. For (some) phantom chain models, the cor- relation function of the discrete Rouse modes can be calcu- lated. Therefore, it should be possible to predict, say, the p-dependence of the diagonal elements of the simulated Rouse mode matrix, Cpp, from an appropriate phantom chain model. In the following we want to provide evidence against this expectation.

The simplest phantom chain model is a freely-jointed chain (FJC) model. For the FJC model the result for Cpq, obtained with the discrete Rouse modes [Eq. (5)], reads (see e.g. [32])

b2

2

1 sin(pT/2N)

Cpq = 0pq 8N

p/N<1 Òpq (for p > 0). (8)

1 Nb2

2 T 2 p2

The limit p/N « 1 coincides with the result obtained for the continuum model [2]. In Eq. (8) be denotes the effective bond length defined by b2 = R2/N from the end-to-end distance Re of asymptotically long chains [2].

Figure 2 compares Eq. (8) to simulation data for ex- cluded volume chains of the BSM and the BFM. The data for all chain lengths collapse onto a common curve which appears to agree well with [sin(pT/2N)]-2, if p/N ≤ 0.01. (In fact, the agreement is not as good as it seems; we return to this point below.) For larger p/N, however, de-

1.4

0 N=256 (FRC) :unselected:

1.2

1.0

10-3

10-2

10-1 p/N

10º

Fig. 3. Correlation function of the Rouse modes Cpp ver- sus p/N for BSM phantom chains (FJCs and FRCs, cf. Sec- tion 2.1.2) of lengths N = 256 and N = 1024. Cpp is scaled by 2(mp)2/N so that the ordinate tends to b2 for p/N -> 0. The simulation results for FJCs and FRCs are compared to Eqs. (8) and (9), respectively. These comparisons utilize the following parameters: for FJCs, b2 = 0.9532 and for FRCs, b2 = Coo x 0.9532, where the characteristic ratio is given by Coo = (1 -a)/(1+a) (with a = - 0.320713). The values of be and a are determined in the simulation.

viations occur. The FJC model overestimates the corre- lation, especially for p/N ≥ 0.1. In [9] and more recently also in [10] it was argued that these modes are dominated by the microstructure of the simulated chain model. For instance, p/N ≥ 0.3 corresponds to subunits of a trimer and smaller. On these local scales, the fact that the re- pulsive monomer interactions of the BSM and the BFM avoid immediate backfolding of the chain and thus con- fer some intrinsic stiffness to the polymer should be taken into account.

The simplest way to achieve this consists in replacing the FJC by a (generalized) freely-rotating chain (FRC). One can introduce the bond angle as a further degree of freedom and still carry out the summation to determine Cpp. For N >> 1 the result reads [9]

8N

b 2

Cpp =

e

1 2

+

sin (pT /2N)

1+2a cos(p/N)+Q2' 4a (9)

where a = (cos 0).

Figure 3 shows that Eqs. (8) and (9) agree respectively with the simulation results for the corresponding phantom chain models. However, they do not for the full-excluded- volume chains in the melt. This is demonstrated in Fig. 2 for the FJC model and in Fig. 4 for the FRC model. To emphasize the differences between the numerical results and FRC prediction the simulation data are divided by the asymptotic behavior expected (and found) for p/N < 1 [Eq. (8)]. With increasing p/N, the simulation data show a continuous depression, which is not reproduced by the FRC model. (The FJC model has not even a minimum;

H. Meyer et al .: Static Rouse Modes and Corrections to Chain Ideality in Polymer Melts

5

1.0

0 [2(Tp)2/Nb2] Cpp

0.9

0.8

~

0.7

Ě x N=512

0.6

BSM:

-

+ N=64

-

0 N=256

N=1024

0.5

10-4

10-3

10-2

10-1

10

p/N

-- + .

1.0

-

X

BFM:

0.9

Z [2(mp)2/Nb2] Cpp

~

+ N=1024

:selected: · N=2048

:selected:

0.8

:selected: × N=4096

:unselected: N=8192

:unselected:

0.7

10-4

10-3

10"

10-1

10

p/N

Fig. 4. Upper panel: Correlation function of the Rouse modes Cpp versus p/N for BSM excluded volume chains. Cpp is scaled by 2(mp)2/Nbe so that the ordinate tends to 1 for p/N > 0 (be = 1.338 [16]). The solid line presents Eq. (19) with param- eters from Table 1. The dashed line indicates the prediction of the FRC model, Eq. (9), with a = - 0.1948 (measured in the simulation). Lower panel: Same as in the upper panel, but for BFM excluded volume chains with be = 3.244 (Table 1) and a = - 0.1055 (measured in the simulation).

cf. Fig. 3.) This depression is, however, compatible with a theory that accounts for the impact of residual excluded volume interactions in the melt. We will sketch this theory in the next section.

## 4 Static Rouse mode correlations: corrections to chain ideality



By means of the random-phase approximation (RPA) Ed- wards derived the pair potential between two monomers in a dense, three-dimensional multi-chain system of asymp- totically long chains [2,33],

(r) = v (8(r) - 4Tr$2 exp(-r/§) .

(10)

This potential consists of two terms. The first term repre- sents the bare repulsive interaction between two monomers. It is of very short range and characterized by the excluded

volume parameter v. The latter is related to the compress- ibility of the multi-chain system [see Eq. (24)]. The second term in Eq. (10) results from the repulsion of all monomers in the system whose compound effect is to attenuate the bare interaction between the tagged monomer pair. It is of range §, where § = b/(12pv)1/2 is the (Edwards) correla- tion length of collective density fluctuations, and b denotes the effective bond length of an ideal polymer chain with all interactions switched off (v = 0).

In a dense (three-dimensional [34]) system we expect both terms to nearly compensate each other and ~(r) to be small. This suggests that a first-order perturbation cal- culation should be appropriate to explore the influence of ৳(r) on the conformational properties of a polymer melt. Following Eq. (7) Cpq can be obtained from the mean- square end-to-end distance between monomers n and m, ([rn -rm]2). For ([rn - rm]2) the perturbation calculation has been carried out. The result for infinitely long chains reads (s = n - m) [16]

R2(s) = 62 |s|- ceV|s|, Ce 1

24 1

. (11)

π pb3 3

We see that ~(r) corrects the result for ideal chains, R2 (s) = b2s, in two ways. It increases the effective bond length from b to be, as already predicted by Edwards [2], and leads to a swelling of the internal distance between two monomers due to the second term -Ce Vs. (We refer to ce as 'swelling factor' in the following.) This swelling is re- sponsable for the deviations of Cpp from the ideal behavior (cf. Fig. 4), as we will demonstrate now.

R2 (s) depends only on the absolute value of the curvi- linear distance s. Thus, we first rewrite Eq. (7) as

Cpq

1 CN N

=

−

dn dm R2 (In - m|) cos N npī COS mqī N

2N2

0

0

N

n

= 1+(-1)p+q 1. −

dn dm Re (n - m) x

2N2 0 0

прт COS "N" Cos MIT , (12)

and then insert Eq. (11) into Eq. (12). The first term of Eq. (11) will yield the result for ideal chains, i.e. Eq. (8) in the limit p/N << 1. The second term of Eq. (11) will modify Eq. (8) in two respects: (i) it provides a correction to ideal chain behavior (i.e. to the diagonal terms of Cpq), (ii) the Rouse modes are not diagonal any longer.

To substantiate these expectations we have to calculate the integral:

n

Ipq = dn N

npT

mqī

dm Vn - m cos N - cos mqT . (13)

Substituting s = n - m and integration by parts gives

3/2 N

N q

Ipq = 1

ds cos SpTT

√

0

N

{cos SqTS

sqT N - sin N

sqT F)}, N (14)

SqTC (v

6

H. Meyer et al .: Static Rouse Modes and Corrections to Chain Ideality in Polymer Melts

where S(Vx) and C(Vx) are the Fresnel integrals

1

·x sin y

S(Vx) =

dy

V2TT Jo

√

,

1 dy

C(Vx) = √ To

.

x

cos y

√

Table 1. Survey of BSM and BFM parameters for systems with variable monomer overlap. E is the energy penalty for full monomer overlap. g and be(g) denote respectively the number of monomers in the blob and the statistical segment length. c1 is the empirical swelling factor discussed in [16]. For the BSM we take c1 = 1.3ce and for the BFM, c1 = Ce [Ce is defined in Eq. (11)].

(15)

For the term in curly braces in Eq. (14) we may use the expression

cos Sq7 sqT S

sq7

−

sin sqT Cv sqT N N =

N

N

1

sq7

COS

2

- sin sqT

− V

2 TI Jo

1. dt e -2v Nt cost2 .

∞

N N



|BSM||||BFM||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|E|g|be (g)|C1|E|g|be (g)|C1|
|00|0.08|1.338|0.564|00|0.246|3.244|0.412|
|4.68|0.23|1.306|0.607|3|0.85|3.213|0.424|
|1.94|0.51|1.274|0.654|0.5|4.43|3.055|0.494|
|0.5|1.83|1.208|0.767|0.1|20|2.917|0.567|
|0.1|9|1.129|0.939|0.01|200|2.795|0.645|
|0.02|45|1.073|1.094|0.001|2000|2.740|0.679|


(16)

This expression is helpful because the underlined term vanishes upon integration over s, whereas the other two terms provide the expected corrections to ideal behavior: the cosine term amends the diagonal components and the third term of Eq. (16) makes the Rouse modes nondiago- nal.

Putting these results together we find (for p, q > 0)

1 62

2 (ideal)

N 2772 N

Cpq =

p

1 b2 TT Ce

N

−

3

10 [1+(-1)p+q]1/8 - × 212 N 18 q

TT3/2p

∞

1. dx cos x dt e

2 It cost2\ .

(17)

0

If we now approximate the integral of the underlined term by replacing the upper bound pm by oo, we obtain

10 da cos x dt e-2V xt cost2

IT

q/p [(q/p)+ 1][v/q/p+1]

= V 8

(18)

p-1/2 - q-1/2 q2 - p2

= TT

V 8 q3l`p

,

and the underlined term vanishes in the limit p > o.

This approximation suggests the Rouse modes to re- main essentially diagonal despite of excluded volume inter- actions. Indeed, numerical analysis of the theoretical result and inspection of the simulation data reveal that the non- diagonal terms Cpq are smaller than the self-correlation Cpp by at least two orders of magnitude. The small values of Cpq make it difficult to separate signal from noise in the simulation. However, the results are still indicative of the parity property predicted by Eq. (17): modes with 'p+q = odd' vanish, while those with 'p+q = even' are finite. This parity is a consequence of the translational invariance- Re depends only on |s|-of the chain which we assumed to be infinitely long in Eq. (11). A more quantitative anal- ysis of the cross correlations requires improvement of the

numerical precision and perhaps refinement of the theory. Two refinements are envisageable: It is possible to relax the approximation 'p = oo' in the underlined integral of Eq. (17) and along with that, to also account for finite-N effects (the latter has been done before in the discussion of the form factor [18]). We plan to work on both aspects - improvement of numerical precision in the simulation and refinement of the theory-in the future.

Here we continue with the approximation 'p = 0o' and examine its consequences. For the diagonal Rouse modes we find

Nb2 |1- TT 2(Tp)2 /8 Ce

Cpp =

p N

- (for p >0). (19)

This result is compared to the simulation data of the BSM and the BFM in Fig. 4. For this comparison we used the empirical swelling factors c1 determined earlier in an analysis of the segmental size distribution in poly- mer melts [16]. This analysis revealed that c1 agrees with the theoretical value ce for the BFM, while for the BFM, a slightly larger value had to be used, c1 = 1.3ce (Ta- ble 1). Here we adopt these values so that the compari- son between theory and simulation contains no further ad- justable parameter. Figure 4 demonstrates that the theory can indeed account for the systematic depression of Cpp below the ideal asymptote, if p/N ≤ 0.1. On the other hand, the behavior of Cpp for larger values of p/N and in particular the upturn for p -> N cannot be described because such large modes should be strongly influenced by the microstructure of the polymer model, which is not treated correctly by the present theory.

## 5 Chains with variable monomer overlap



In section 3 we found that phantom chain models are not capable of describing conformational properties of flexible polymers in a melt by comparing simulation data for ex- cluded volume chains to phantom chain calculations. The simulation provides a further means to support this con- clusion. One can vary the strength of the repulsive inter- action between two monomers.

H. Meyer et al .: Static Rouse Modes and Corrections to Chain Ideality in Polymer Melts

7

1.8 TT

1.7

& 1.6

1.5

[2(Tp) /N] Cp

1.4

1.3

1.2

1.1

1.0

TT

BSM:

O

×

:unselected:

:unselected: :unselected: :unselected:

×

:selected: :selected:

X

***** **** 6 *

A

:unselected: o E=0

:unselected: E=4.68

1

A DDDDDD :selected: :selected: :selected:

*

×

E=1.94

:selected: A E=0.5

* E=0.1

:unselected: ¢ E=0.02

* *

10-2

10-1

p/N

Ce(g) is given by Eq. (11) with be = be(g), 'erfc' is the complementary error function, x = s/g, and g is the num- ber of monomers in a blob. (We will comment on the blob after Eq. (26).) g is related to the correlation length § and the effective bond length b of an unperturbed ideal chain via [21]

g = 12 (E) = 1 == S(q=> 0), (24)

Up

where S(q) is the collective structure factor of the polymer melt. Inserting Eq. (22) into Eq. (21) we obtain

10º

1

Fig. 5. Cpp versus p/N for hard (E = 0) and soft (finite values for E) monomers from BSM simulations for N = 256. The smaller the value of the overlap energy E, the softer the monomers (see Sec. 2).

Figure 5 exemplifies the results of such an analysis for the BSM. The figure depicts Cpp for chains with full ex- cluded volume (E = 0) and with finite energy penalty E for monomer overlap. Obviously, the p-dependence of Cpp qualitatively changes with E. As the monomers be- come softer with decreasing E, the curvature of Cpp for p/N ≤ 0.1, observed for the excluded volume chains, pro- gressively vanishes. This clearly demonstrates that this feature is determined by the strength of monomer repul- sion in the melt. It is possible to rationalize these findings by an extension of the perturbation theory of Section 4 to soft monomers.

## 5.1 Internal distances for finite monomer overlap



To calculate Cpp we begin, as before, by determining R2 (s) first. Quite generally, R2 (s) is related to the bond corre- lation function

Pı (|n - m|) = an

(20) am ar(n) Or(m)

by

R2(s) = |dn |dm an Om

· Or(n) Or(m)

(21) = 2125 | dt 1- S -P1(t) ,

where l is the average bond length. For monomers with different degree of softness the expression for P1(s) has recently been obtained from first-order perturbation the- ory. It reads [21]

P1(x) = g3/2 4V/TCP(g)

√ 1 V/2e2ª erfc (v2x), −

(22)

where

(3)= c()(()"

(23)

R2(s, g) =

b2(g)s

Ce(g)

[ 1 √ x

−

V 8 T 1 - 20 erfc (2x) }. (25)

Equation (25) has the following asymptotic behavior

Vg

Ce(g) 1 - R2(s, g)

b2(g)s

π

1 - 25/2 3,1/2 VEC for x <1, (26)

2

≃

1

√ x

for x >>1.

Here we return to the comment mentioned above. Soft- ening of the monomer repulsion introduces the blob size g as a new parameter, and the situation becomes similar to that of semidilute solutions in good solvent. Inside the blob chain segments behave as if they were in dilute solution. They do not see their neighbors and are slightly swollen. Since the monomer-monomer repulsion is weak, we find for x « 1 that the swelling takes the form of a first-order Fixman expansion, familiar from the study of excluded volume effects in dilute solutions close to the theta point [2,3]. For large x-that is, for chain segments much bigger than the blob size-Eq. (25) gives back Eq. (11). On such large scales the polymer system behaves like a dense melt of blob chains which repel each other. Hence, the swelling of internal distances is the same as that of chains whose monomers have full excluded interaction.

To compare simulation and theory we have to deter- mine the swelling factor and the blob size. The blob size was obtained from the low-q limit of S(q) [cf. Eq. (24)]. For large E this limit can be read off reliably from the simula- tion data. For the weakest energy penalties, however, S(q) does not reach a plateau for the smallest q-values studied. Here we determined g by fitting S(q) to the RPA formula S(q)-1= g-1+b2(g)q2/12 [2]. The resulting blob sizes have thus larger error bars than those for large E. The fit to the RPA formula also yields an estimate for be (g). This estimate can be crosschecked and optimized when deter- mining the swelling factors. For the swelling factors we adopt the result found previously-that is, c1 = ce for the BFM and c1 = 1.3ce for the BSM-but allow c1 to depend on g via be. For small g, i.e. weak to vanishing monomer overlap, b2(g) may be obtained fairly reliably by fitting the asymptotic behavior for x >> 1 to the simulation data

8

H. Meyer et al .: Static Rouse Modes and Corrections to Chain Ideality in Polymer Melts

10º

:unselected: 0 E=00

× :selected:

E=4.68

A

E=1.94

+ E=0.5

E=0.1 :unselected:

* E=0.02

[1-R2(s)/(b2(g)s)] g12/c,

X << 1

10-1

0

-0.2

BSM:

-0.4

:unselected: O E=co

× E=4.68 :selected:

([2(mp)2Cpp/Nb21-1) g1/2/c1

BSM

2000

x > 1 >

10-2.

10-2

10-1 10° 101 x=s/g

102

103

10º

:unselected: 0 E=00 × E=3 :selected:

E=0.5 A

+ E=0.1

E=0.01 0 :unselected:

*

E=0.001

[1-R2(s)/(b2(g)s)] g12/ce

10-1

X << 1

-0.6 A :selected:

E=1.94

+ E=0.5

-0.8 :unselected: E=0.1

*

E=0.02

X << 1

-1.0

<- x >> 1

10-3 10-2

10-1

10° x=gp/N

10

0

:unselected:

-0.2

:unselected:

+

A

D :unselected:

*

+

A

([2(mp)2Cpp/Nb21-1) g12/ce

BFM

X >> 1 ->

10" N

10-3 10-2 101 10º 101 102 103 104 x=s/g

Fig. 6. Scaling plot of Re(s), as suggested by Eq. (25), for monomers of different softness. The upper panel depicts BSM data for N = 256, the lower panel shows BFM data for N = 2048. The dashed line indicates Eq. (25). The solid lines show the asymptotic behavior from Eq. (26) for small and large x = s /g. The values used to scale the axes may be found in Table 1.

for R2(s, g) [16]. For large g, this fitting procedure is more problematic because one has to choose the fit interval, and it is hard to find an extended regime (of intermediate x val- ues) where the simulation and theoretical curves have the same shape. The results for b2 (g) were thus obtained by a two-step procedure: First, Eq. (25) was fitted to R2 (s, g). Then, the fit result for b2 (g) was optimized in such a way that it yields a good data collapse in Fig. 6 and that the resulting master curve is close to the theoretical predic- tion, Eq. (25). The so-obtained values for g and b2(g) are collected in Table 1.

In Fig. 6 we compare Eqs. (25) and (26) with the nu- merical results from the BSM and the BFM for various values of the energy penalty E. The figure demonstrates that there is good agreement between theory and simula- tion, perhaps with the exception of the smallest E-values. However, here the numerical uncertainties for g and be are largest.

## 5.2 Rouse modes for finite monomer overlap



The result for the mean-square internal end-to-end dis- tance may be inserted into Eq. (7) to derive a scaling pre- diction for the correlation function of the Rouse modes.

-0.4

BFM:

×

X

o E=oo :unselected:

-0.6

+

*

:unselected:

:unselected:

*

-0.8

E=3 × :selected:

A

:selected: A

E=0.5

+

+ E=0.1

X << 1

*

:unselected: E=0.01

*

E=0.001

:unselected:

:unselected:

*

X >> 1

*

-1.0

*

-1.2L

*

10-4 10-3 10-2 101 10º 101 102

x=gp/N

Fig. 7. Scaling plot of Cpp, as suggested by Eq. (27), for monomers of different softness. The upper panel depicts BSM data for N = 256, the lower panel shows BFM data for N = 2048. The dashed line indicates Eq. (27). The solid lines show the asymptotic behavior from Eq. (28) for small and large x = gp/N. The values to scale the axes are given in Table 1.

We find for the diagonal elements of the Rouse mode ma- trix the following expression (again in the limit p > 00, see approximation in Eq. (18) for comparison)

2(Tp)2

1

Cpp - 1 = TT Ce(g) S (1+4/(Tx)2 ×

Nb2(g) V 2

L

1

1 - VTX + π

x

−

√ 1

, (27)

2

TT XC 1

2

where x = gp/N. This equation has the following asymp- totic behavior

Vg 2(Tp)2 Cpp - 1

Ce (g)

Nb2(g)

x √

V8

≃

π

-1+1/Tx

for x <1,

for x >> 1. (28)

Equations (27) and (28) are compared to BSM and BFM data in Fig. 7. The agreement between theory and simu- lation is of similar quality as in Fig. 6.

H. Meyer et al .: Static Rouse Modes and Corrections to Chain Ideality in Polymer Melts

9

## 6 Summary



The simulation models studied in this work have very flex- ible chains in common. As chain stiffness effects are re- duced to a minimum-they only come in due to the avoid- ance of immediate chain backfolding-one should expect ideal chain behavior to appear clearly.

We demonstrated that, even under these favorable cir- cumstances, the assumption of chain ideality on all length scales down to the monomer size does not hold. The cor- relation function of the Rouse modes displays systematic deviations from the (p/N)-2 scaling expected for ideal chains. Our analysis suggests that these deviations may be traced back to the fact that repulsive interactions be- tween chain segments in the melt are not fully screened. For chain segments of size s » 1 there is an entropic penalty ~ 1/vs for bringing two segments together [16]. This penalty swells the segments and causes systematic deviations from Flory's ideality hypothesis. The picture of independent chains with random-walk-like conformations is thus not acceptable for polymer melts. Multi-chain ef- fects reflecting the interplay of chain connectivity and melt incompressibility should be taken into account.

In the present work we discussed the impact of these multi-chain effects on static chain properties. It is, how- ever, natural to expect that they will also affect the poly- mer dynamics. An analysis of this influence is underway.

We are indebted to S. Obukhov for valuable discussions and to the IDRIS (Orsay) for a generous grant of computer time. Fi- nancial support by the IUF, the ESF STIPOMAT programme, and the DFG (grant number KR 2854/1-1) is gratefully ac- knowledged.

## References



1. P. E. Rouse, J. Chem. Phys. 21, 1272 (1953).

2. M. Doi and S. F. Edwards, The Theory of Polymer Dy- namics (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1986).

3. M. Rubinstein and R. H. Colby, Polymer Physics (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003).

4. T. C. B. McLeish, Adv. Phys. 51, 1379 (2002).

5. W. Paul and G. D. Smith, Rep. Prog. Phys. 67, 1117 (2004).

6. L. Harnau, R. G. Winkler, and P. Reineker, Europhys. Lett. 45, 488 (1999).

7. S. Krushev, W. Paul, and G. D. Smith, Macromolecules 35, 4198 (2002).

8. M. Bulacu and E. van der Giessen, J. Chem. Phys. 123, 114901 (2005).

9. T. Kreer, J. Baschnagel, M. Müller, and K. Binder, Macro- molecules 34, 1105 (2001).

10. D. Molin, A. Barbieri, and D. Leporini, J. Phys .: Condens. Matter 18, 7543 (2006).

11. D. Richter et al., J. Chem. Phys. 111, 6107 (1999).

12. A. Arbe et al., Macromolecules 34, 1281 (2001).

13. G. Allegra and F. Ganazzoli, in Advances in Chemical Physics (Wiley, New York, 1989), Vol. 75, Chap. Chain configurations and dynamics in the gaussian approxima- tion, pp. 265-348.

14. P. J. Flory, Statistical Mechanics of Chain Molecules (Wi- ley, New York, 1969).

15. J. P. Wittmer et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 147801 (2004). 16. J. P. Wittmer et al., Phys. Rev. E 76, 011803 (2007).

17. J. P. Wittmer et al., Europhys. Lett. 77, 56003 (2007).

18. P. Beckrich et al., Macromolecules 40, 3805 (2007).

19. A. N. Semenov and S. P. Obukhov, J. Phys .: Condens. Matter 17, S1747 (2005).

20. J. Baschnagel, J. P. Wittmer, and H. Meyer, in Computa- tional Soft Matter: From Synthetic Polymers to Proteins, edited by N. Attig, K. Binder, H. Grubmüller, and K. Kre- mer (NIC Series, Jülich, 2004), Vol. 23, pp. 83-140, (avail- able from http://www.fz-juelich.de/nic-series).

21. J. P. Wittmer et al., Intrachain orientational correlations in dense polymer solutions (preprint).

22. H. Meyer and F. Müller-Plathe, J. Chem. Phys. 115, 7807 (2001).

23. H. Meyer and F. Müller-Plathe, Macromolecules 35, 1241 (2002).

24. T. Vettorel and H. Meyer, J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2, 616 (2006).

25. T. Vettorel, H. Meyer, J. Baschnagel, and M. Fuchs, Phys. Rev. E 75, 041801 (2007).

26. K. Kremer and G. S. Grest, J. Chem. Phys. 92, 5057 (1990).

27. R. Auhl et al., J. Chem. Phys. 119, 12718 (2003).

28. M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley, Computer Simulation of Liquids (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1987).

29. H .- P. Deutsch and K. Binder, J. Chem. Phys. 94, 2294 (1991).

30. W. Paul et al., J. Phys. II 1, 37 (1991).

31. D. P. Landau and K. Binder, A Guide to Monte Carlo Simulations in Statistical Physics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000).

32. P. H. Verdier, J. Chem. Phys. 45, 2118 (1966).

33. S. F. Edwards, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 8, 1670 (1975).

34. A. N. Semenov and A. Johner, Eur. Phys. J. E 12, 469 (2003).

