# Non-extensivity of the chemical potential of polymer melts

## 1 Introduction



cation of this mean-field result is that density fluctuations are small beyond the screening length §, hence, negligible [2]. The size of a chain segment of arc-length s of a test chain of length n plugged into a melt of chemically identi- cal N-polymers of (normalized) length distribution P(N)

One of the cornerstones of polymer physics is Flory's ide- ality hypothesis [1,2,3] which states that polymer chains in the melt follow Gaussian statistics, i.e. they are random walks without long range correlations. The official justifi-

2

Wittmer: Non-extensivity of the chemical potential of polymer melts

and mean length (N) [4] scales, hence, as

R2(s) = {r2) = 62 s for g < < < < < {N}2

(1)

with b denoting the effective bond length and g the number of monomers spanning the screening length § [2]. See Fig. 1 for a sketch of some of the notations used in this paper. The extensivity of the chemical potential pc (n) of the test chain with respect to n,

Mc (n) = un for g < n ‹ (N)2 ,

(a)

density

p= const

n/R(n) d

(b)

k

~(r)

b

'Correlation hole .

l=k+s

n

R(n)

1

Repulsion

Fig. 1. Sketch of the problem addressed: (a) Two chains repel each other in an incompressible melt since the total density p cannot fluctuate. In d dimensions this constraint leads to an entropic "correlation hole potential " u* ~ n/ pRd (n) ~ ~ 1-d/2 one has to pay for joining both chains with n and R(n) being, respectively, the length and the typical size of the test chains [1,9]. This sets a non-extensive deviation duc (n) ~ u* (n) with respect to the chemical potential of asymptotically long chains. (b) We compute within one-loop perturbation theory the lead- ing non-extensive contribution to the mean self-interaction en- ergy (un), of a test chain with respect to its Gaussian reference state, un being the sum of the effective monomer interactions ~(r) between pairs of monomers k and l = k + s at distance r.

(2)

u > 0 being the effective chemical potential per monomer, is yet another well-known consequence of Flory's hypoth- esis [1]. The upper boundary (N)2 indicated in Eq. (1) and Eq. (2) for later reference is due to the well-known swelling of extremely large test chains where the bath acts as a good solution [1,3,5].

Assuming Eq. (2) to hold for the N-chains of the bath, dense grand-canonical "equilibrium polymers" [6,7] are thus supposed to be "Flory size distributed",

P(N) = pe-IN,

(3) films [5,9,17]. The physical mechanism of these correla- where as elsewhere in this paper, temperature and Boltz- mann's constant have been set to unity [8]. Eq. (3) im- plies, of course, that (NP) = p!/up for the p-th moment of the distribution. Strictly speaking, Eq. (3) applies only for g « N « (N)2, but both limits become irrelevant for systems of large mean chain length, u -> 0, where only exponentially few chains are not within these bounds. tions is related to the "correlation hole" of density n/ R(n)d in d dimensions with R(n) being the typical size of the test chain (Fig. 1(a)). Due to the overall incompressibil- ity of the melt this is known to set an entropic penalty u*(n) ~ n/ pR(n)d which has to be paid if two chains of length n are joined together or which is gained if a chain is broken into two parts [9]. The same effective repulsion Recently, Flory's hypothesis has been challenged by the discovery of long-range intrachain correlations in three acts also between adjacent chain segments of length s and this on all scales [11,13]. In three dimensions this leads to dimensional melts [5,10,11,12,13,14,15,16] and ultrathin a weak swelling of the chain segments characterized, e.g.,

Wittmer: Non-extensivity of the chemical potential of polymer melts

3

by

Cs Vs

1 - R2(s) =

for g < s « n

(4)

b2 s

with Cs = \24/T3 / pb3 denoting the "swelling coefficient" [10,18,13]. Similar corrections with respect to Flory's ide- ality hypothesis have been obtained for other intrachain conformational properties such as higher moments of the segmental size distribution [13], orientational bond cor- relations [10,18,16] or the single chain structure factor [11,12].

In this paper we question the validity of Flory's hy- pothesis for a central thermodynamic property, the chem- ical potential ulc(n) of a test chain inserted into a three- dimensional melt. Our key claim is that the correlation hole potential leads to a deviation

δμς(η) = με - μη ~ u* (n) ~ +1/pvη for η « (Ν) (5)

that is non-extensive in chain length and this irrespective of the distribution P(N) of the bath. Covering a broader n-range we will show explicitly for a melt of quenched Flory-size distribution that

8Hc(n) ~ (1-2un) for g < n < < N)2

(6)

where we have defined cu = 3cs/8. This correction implies

for the annealed length distribution of linear equilibrium polymers that (to leading order)

P(N) ~ pe-uN-opc(N)

~ue-AN (1 - VN

Cp =(1-2uN)

large mean chain length. Eq. (8) will allow us to demon- strate Eq. (6) numerically from the observed non-exponen- tiality of the length distribution of equilibrium polymer melts obtained by means of Monte Carlo simulation of a standard lattice model [7,19].

The one-loop perturbation calculation leading to Eq. (6) is presented in Section 2 where we will also address the chemical potential of monodisperse melts. Section 3 out- lines the numerical algorithm used for the simulation of equilibrium polymers. Our computational results are com- pared to theory in Section 4.

## 2 Perturbation calculation



## 2.1 General remarks



Following Edwards [2] we take as a reference for the per- turbation calculation a melt of Gaussian chains of effective bond length b. Averages performed over this unperturbed reference system are labeled by an index 0. The general task is to compute the ratio Q(n)/Q0(n) of the perturbed to the unperturbed single chain partition function

1 -

Q(n) = 1 - (e-un)~

Q0(n) n

(un)o = >(n-s) | dr G(r,s)v(r)

(9)

s=0

with the perturbation potential un being the sum of the ef-

fective monomer interactions ~(r) of all pairs of monomers of the test chain of length n, and G(r, s) denoting the Gaussian propagator for a chain segment of length s [2]. The factor n- s in Eq. (9) counts the number of equivalent monomer pairs separated by an arc-length s. The devia-

(7)

(8)

where both the lower (g << N) and the upper limit (N «

(N)2) of validity become again irrelevant in the limit of

4

Wittmer: Non-extensivity of the chemical potential of polymer melts

tion ouc (n) from Flory's hypothesis is then given by the where we have defined the screening length § following, contribution to (un), which is non-linear in n. The calcu- lation of Eq. (9) in d dimensions is most readily performed in Fourier-Laplace space with q being the wavevector con- jugated to the monomer distance r and t the Laplace vari- able conjugated to the chain length n. The Laplace trans- formed averaged perturbation potential reads

e.g., eq 5.38 of Ref. [2]. Interestingly, the number g of monomers spanning the blob, i.e., the lower bound of va- lidity of various statements made in the Introduction, can be determined experimentally or in a computer simula- tion from the low-wavevector limit of the total monomer structure factor and, due to this operational definition, g is sometimes called "dimensionless compressibility" [15,16]. F0(q) stands for the ideal chain intramolecular structure

Ut =

∞ dn (un)o e-nt

n=0

- dªq 1

= - (2T)d +2 ~G(q,t)õ(q)

(10)

(11) factor of the given distribution P(N) of the bath. The ef- fective interaction, Eq. (12), depends thus in general on the length distribution of the melt the test chain is in- serted. For Flory distributed melts the structure factor is,

where the factor 1/t2 accounts for the combinatorics and G(q,t)=1/((aq)2+t) represents the Fourier-Laplace trans- formed Gaussian propagator G(r, s) [2,16] with a = b/v/2d being a convenient monomeric length.

## 2.2 Effective interaction potential



We have still to specify ~(q), the effective interaction be- tween test chain monomers in reciprocal space. This in- teraction is partially screened by the background of the monomers of the bath. It has been shown by Edwards [2,12] that within linear response this corresponds to

## 1



= 1

(12)

৳(q) v + Fo(q)p.

The bare excluded volume v indicated in the first term of Eq. (12) characterizes the short-range repulsion between

e.g., given by [12]

F0(q) = 2 (aq)2 + p (14)

while for monodisperse melts it reads F0(q) = NfD(y) with y = N(aq)2 and fD(y) = 2(e-y - 1 + y)/y2 being Debye's function [2]. We remind that within the Padé ap- proximation for monodisperse chains Eq. (14) holds with u replaced by 2/N [2].

gp

Below we will focus on incompressible solutions (g = 1/vp -> 0) where the effective interaction is given by the inverse structure factor, ~(q) ~ 1/ pFo(q), i.e. we will ig- nore local physics on scales smaller than the correlation length § and assume that both the test chain and the chains of the bath are larger than g. The effective poten- tial takes simple forms at low and high wavevectors corre- sponding, respectively, to distances much larger or much smaller than the typical size of the bath chains. In the low- wavevector limit the potential becomes ño = ~ (q -> 0) =

the monomers. Thermodynamic consistency requires [20,12,15]

that v is proportional to the inverse of the measured com- pressibility of the solution

1

1 (a/})2

(13)

≡

2p

Wittmer: Non-extensivity of the chemical potential of polymer melts

5

(N) / (N2) p for general P(N), i.e. No = 2p/p for Flory distributed and 00 = 1/pN for monodisperse melts. Long test chains are ruled by to which acts as a weak repulsive pseudo-potential with associated (bare) Fixman parame- ter z = vov/n. As already recalled in the Introduction, test chains with n >> ((N)2 / (N))2 ~ (N)2 [4] must thus swell and obey excluded volume statistics [1,3].

interested in (possibly diverging) contributions linear in the length of the test chain or independent of it, we can freely subtract linear terms (i.e., terms ~ 1/t2 in Laplace space) or constant terms (i.e., terms ~ 1/t) to regularize and to simplify ut. Such a transformation leads to

The effective potential of incompressible melts becomes scale free for larger wavevectors corresponding to the self- similar random walks,

~(q) ~ 2p (aq)2 for 1/q <b(N)1/2,

(15)

i.e. the interactions decrease as a power law with distance and this irrespective of the length distribution P(N). One expects that short test chains with n « (N) see an inter- action potential of effectively infinite bath chains as de- scribed by Eq. (15). Please note that Eq. (15) lies at the heart of the power-law swelling of chain segments, Eq. (4), and related properties alluded to above [10,12,13,16].

## 2.3 Ultraviolet divergency



Coming back to the computation of Eq. (11) one realizes that a naive perturbation calculation using the effective interaction given in Eq. (12) is formally diverging at high wavevectors in three dimensions (becoming only regular below d = 2) due to the monomer self-interactions which We obtain, hence, in n-space should be subtracted. Using Eq. (15) instead of Eq. (12) §plc(n) = 1 1 (d- 2)(4T)d/2 pad n - n2-d/2 1-d/2 '2-d/2 even makes things worse due to an additional divergency (19) associated with the self-interactions of the blobs whose where duc (n) stands for the non-extensive contribution to size was set to zero (g > 0). However, since we are not (un). Note that the first term in the brackets scales as

dª q 1 2F0 1 - (aq)2 -t + ...

(2TT) & #2 (aq)2 + t

Ut = 1

2(vp+Fo1) v

(16)

where " ... " stands for the linear and constant contribu- tions we do not compute. Converging now for incompress- ible melts for d < 2, the latter reformulation will prove useful below. (See Section 2.6 for the complete reguliza- tion of the ultraviolet divergency for incompressible three dimensional melts.)

## 2.4 Flory-distributed melts



Applying Eq. (16) to incompressible Flory distributed melts

this leads to

1 μ - t - dª q (27r)d G(q,t) + .. . (17)

Ut =

2p +2

=

1

(p/t2 - 1/t)G(r=0,t)+ ... (18)

2p

where we have read Eq. (17) as an inverse Fourier trans- form taken at r = 0. Remembering that a factor 1/t in t-space stands for an integral f"" ds in n-space, the inverse Laplace transform of ut can be expressed in terms of inte- grals of the return probability G(r = 0, s) = (4Tsa2)-d/2

6

Wittmer: Non-extensivity of the chemical potential of polymer melts

1

1/2

+1/n

FD MD Padé - MD Debye

<N>=100

du (n)/c

0

ideal chains

Eq. (6)

-1/n 1/2 Eq. (28)

Eq. (26) Eq. (27) }

n =< N>

:- 3/n 1/2

0

10

101

-1

01

n

102 103

Fig. 2. Non-extensive deviation of the chemical potential 8pc(n)/cu as a function of the test chain length n. Flory dis- tributed (FD) melts are indicated by solid lines, monodisperse (MD) melts by dash-dotted and dashed lines for Padé approx- imation and full Debye function, respectively. The bold lines refer to test chains in melts of constant (mean) chain length with (N) = 100. The deviation changes sign at n ~ (N). The thinner lines refer to test chains of same length as the typical melt chain, n = (N), where the asymptotic Gaussian behavior (8pc(n) = 0) is approached systematically from below.

the correlation hole in d dimension. Its marginal dimen- sion is d = 2. The second term characterizes the effective two-body interaction of the test chain with itself. As one expects [1], its marginal dimension is d = 4. Although Eq. (19) is formally obtained for d < 2 it applies to higher dimensions by analytic continuation.

In three dimensions Eq. (19) becomes

δμς(η) = 1 (4TT)3/2 pa3 1 (n-1/2 - 2un1/2) (20)

which demonstrates finally the non-extensive correction

to the ideal polymer chain chemical potential announced

in Eq. (6) and sketched for 1/u = (N) = 100 in Fig. 2

is given below in Section 2.6.) As anticipated above, the first term in Eq. (20) dominates for short test chains. It is independent of the polydispersity and scales as the cor- relation hole potential, Eq. (5). The second term dom- inates for large test chains with n > 1/(2) becoming non-perturbative for n >> 1/u2. Please note that these extremely long chains are essentially absent in the Flory bath but may be introduced on purpose. Both contribu- tions to ouc(n) decrease with increasing n. They corre- spond to an effective enhancement factor of the partition function quite similar to the duc (n) = - (7 - 1) log(n) in the standard excluded volume statistics with y ~ 1.16 > 1 being the self-avoiding walk susceptibility exponent [1]. Interestingly, while δμ.(n) decreases at fixed (N) it increases as ouc(n) = - cp/ Vn for a test chain with n = (N), as shown by the thin solid line in Fig. 2. The chemical potential of typical chains of the bath approaches thus the Gaussian limit from below.

## 2.5 Equilibrium polymers



Flory distributed polymer melts are obtained naturally in systems of self-assembled linear equilibrium polymers where branching and the formation of closed rings are forbidden [6,7,8]. Since the suggested correction duc(N) to the ideal chain chemical potential is weak the system must remain to leading order Flory distributed and Eq. (6) should thus hold [21]. Using P(N)/P0(N) = Q(N)/Q0(N) one obtains directly the corrected length distribution for equilibrium polymers announced in Eq. (8). Note that Eq. (8) is properly normalized, i.e. the prefactor u of the

by the bold solid line. (A slightly different demonstration

Wittmer: Non-extensivity of the chemical potential of polymer melts

7

distribution remains exact if 8uc(N) is given by Eq. (6). formula, Eq. (24), can be performed leading to

Since the distribution becomes broader the first moment

increases slightly at given p:

(N) = p-1(1+cu\/UIT).

(21) Vn 2p 1 −

More generally, one expects for the pth moment

(NP) = PL (1 + CHUVA p! (2)(p+3/2)-I(p+1/2))

(22) with I(x) being the Gamma function [22]. The non-expo- nentiality parameter Kp = 1 - (NP) /p! (N)? should thus scale as

Kp = WpCu Vp

(23)

with wp=(T(p+1/2)+xpp !- 21(p+3/2))/p! being a p-dependent geometrical factor. Eq. (23) will be tested numerically in Section 4.

## 2.6 Incompressible melts in three dimensions



It is instructive to recover Eq. (20) directly in three dimen- sions. For that purpose we may subtract 1/(aq)2 from the propagator G(q, t) in Eq. (16) which amounts to take off a linear and a constant contribution. Taking the incom- pressible limit this yields

Ut = 1 d'q 1 2/Fo(q) - (aq)2 -t -t 1 + ...

(2TT)3 +2

t + (aq)2

(aq)2 2p

(24) from below (thin dash-dotted line).

for a general structure factor F0(q). Assuming Eq. (14) for F0(q) we obtain by straightforward integration over mo- mentum ut =- (8πρα3)-1 (μ-t)/t3/2 + .... After taking the inverse Laplace transform this confirms Eq. (20). In- terestingly, the inverse Laplace transform of the general

§ plc (n) = 2p 1

1 (exp(-n(aq)2) - fc(q,n))

(27)3 ď3 q

= Cu

d3 q

(27) 3 fc(q, n)

(25)

where fc(q,n) = (2 (N) /Fo(q) - y) (1-exp(-xy))/y with x = n/ (N) and y = (N) (aq)2. The first term in Eq. (25) corresponds to the infinite bath chain limit (x -> 0) which does not depend on the length distribution P(N). The in- tegral over fc(q, n) stands for finite-x corrections for larger test chains.

## 2.7 Monodisperse melts



We turn now to incompressible monodisperse melts in three dimensions. As already mentioned above, the Debye function for monodisperse melts can be approximated by the structure factor of Flory distributed melts, Eq. (14), replacing u by 2/N. It follows thus from Eq. (6) that within Padé approximation we expect

8pc(n)~ (1-4x) (26)

for n « N2 with x = n/N. This is indicated by the dash-dotted line in Fig. 2. If the test chain and the bath chains are of equal length, x = 1, this leads to δμc(n) = -3cp/ Vn, i.e. plc (n) approaches again its asymptotic limit

The calculation of the chemical potential deviations for the full Debye function can be performed taking advantage of Eq. (25). Specializing the formula to the monodisperse case this yields after some simple transformations

ouc(n) = (1 - Ic(@))

(27)

8

Wittmer: Non-extensivity of the chemical potential of polymer melts

where the finite-x correction is expressed by the integral

.00

2 -y) > fp(y) y 1 - exp(-xy) dy Vy where the bold dashed line corresponds to a variation of n at constant N = 100 and the thin dashed line to a test chain of same length as the chains of the bath, x = 1. x IT 0 . Eq. (27) can be evaluated numerically as shown in Fig. 2

numerically Ic(x = 1) = 3.19. We obtain thus

δμς(n) = - 2.19cμ/ νη

(28)

as indicated by the thin dashed line.

## 3 Algorithmic issues



Both lines are bounded by the predictions for Flory dis- The theoretical predictions derived above should hold in

tributed melts and the Padé approximation of monodis- perse chains.

any sufficiently dense polymer solution assuming that the chains are not too short. Since the direct measurement of The evaluation of Eq. (27) deserves some comments. The underlined bracket under the integral Ic(x) defines a slowly varying function of y decreasing from 2 to 1 when y increases from 0 to infinity. Without this slow factor the integral can be scaled: It is proportional to x and evaluates to Ic(x) = 2x in agreement with the correction term obtained for Flory distributed polymers, Eq. (6). The the chemical potential of monodisperse chains (discussed in Section 2.7) requires a delicate thermodynamic inte- gration [23,24,15] we test the theoretical framework by computing numerically the length distribution P(N) in systems of annealed equilibrium polymers [21]. The pre- sented configuration ensembles have been obtained using the well-known "bond fluctuation model" (BFM) [19,25,7] integral is mostly build up by the region xy < A with an - an efficient lattice Monte Carlo scheme where a coarse- error ~ 1/VA. For large x >> 1 only small y contribute grained monomer occupies 8 lattice sites on a simple cubic to the integral; the underlined term in the integral can be

lattice (i.e., the volume fraction is 8p) and bonds between replaced by 2 and we obtain asymptotically Ic(x) = 4x monomers can vary in length and direction. All length in agreement with the Padé approximation, Eq. (26). If scales are given in units of the lattice constant. Systems the first subdominant contribution to the integral is also with an annealed size distribution are obtained by at- computed one gets Ic(x) = 4x - 1.13x for large x. For tributing a finite scission energy E to each bond which small test chains, the integral provides the first correction has to be paid whenever the bond between two monomers Ic(x) = 2x, i.e., it vanishes for x -> 0 as already noted. In short, we recover the known asymptotic for short and long test chains but the crossover is very sluggish. The simple Padé approximation, Eq. (26), is off by ~ 40% in

is broken. Standard Metropolis Monte Carlo is used to reversibly break and recombine the chains [7,26]. Branch- ing and formation of closed rings are forbidden. Only lo- cal hopping moves have been used since the breaking and recombination of chains reduce the relaxation times dra- matically compared to monodisperse systems [26].

the crossover region where x ~ 1. Note finally that if the test chain is a chain of the bath (x = 1) one evaluates

Wittmer: Non-extensivity of the chemical potential of polymer melts

9

We only present data for one high density where half of the lattice sites are occupied (p = 0.5/8). It has been shown [13,15] that for this density we have a dimensionless compressibility g = 0.24, i.e. the system may be regarded as incompressible on all scales and the lower bound of validity of the theory is irrelevant, and a swelling coef- ficient Cs = 0.41. Hence, Cu = 3cs/8 ~ 0.16 for the only parameter of the theory tested here. We use periodic simu- lation boxes of linear length L = 256 containing 220 ~ 106 monomers. The scission energy E has been increased sys- tematically up to E = 15 which corresponds to a mean chain length (N) ~ 6100. The configurations used here have already been tested and analyzed in previous publica- tions discussing the non-ideal behavior of configurational intrachain properties [18,11,12,16].

(a) 100

10-1

(c)

(b) 104

§ 103

102

exp(-x)

10'4

1.0

:unselected: O p=1

:unselected: p=2

:unselected: p=3

:selected: A p=4

exp(E/2)

y=P(N) <N>

10

10-2 0.9

0

5

10

15

:selected:

0.7

10-3

0.8

depletion

E

:selected: < E=13

:unselected: O E=11

:unselected: E=9

E=7

A E=5

0.6

0.5

10-2

× 10-1 :selected:

10º

104 0 1 2

3

1

4

5

7

9 10 8

X=N/<N> 6

Fig. 3. Chain length distribution P(N) of linear equilibrium polymers for different scission energies E obtained at number density p = 0.5/8 of the BFM Monte Carlo algorithm: (a) The main panel shows the collapse of the rescaled distribution y = P(N) (N) as a function of x = N/ (N) for several E as indicated. The exponential decay (solid line) implied by Flory's ideality hypothesis is apparently (to first order) consistent with our data. (b) First four moments of the distribution vs. E. (c) Replot of the data of panel (a) in log-linear coordinates focusing on short chains. The data points are systematically

## 4 Computational results.



The main panel of Figure 3 presents the normalized length distribution P(N) for different scission energies E as in- dicated. A nice data collapse is apparently obtained if P(N) (N) is plotted as a function of the reduced chain length x = N/ (N) using the measured mean chain length (N). At first sight, there is no sign of deviation from the exponential decay indicated by the solid line. The mean chain length itself is given in panel (b) as a function of E together with some higher moments (NP) = EN NPP(N) of the distribution. As indicated by the dashed line, we find (NP) 1/P ~ exp(E/2) as expected from standard lin- ear aggregation theory [6,7,8]. The data presented in the first two panels of Fig. 3 is thus fully consistent with older

below the exponential decay (solid line) for x << 1.

computational work [7,26] which has let us to believe that Flory's ideality hypothesis holds rigorously.

Closer inspection of the histograms reveals, however, deviations for small x << 1. As can be seen from panel (c), the probability for short chains is reduced with respect to the Flory distribution indicated by the solid line. This depletion agrees, at least qualitatively, with the predicted positive deviation of the chemical potential, Eq. (5).

The curvature of - log(P(N)), i.e. the non-extensive deviation of the chemical potential from Flory's ideality hypothesis, is further analyzed in Figure 4. Motivated by

10

Wittmer: Non-extensivity of the chemical potential of polymer melts

(b)

10k W[P(N)] / c u1/2(2-1/21/2)

:selected: +

:selected:

5

:unselected:

:unselected:

X. -1/2

0

10

(a)

:selected:

-1/2

X

:unselected:

+

1/2 5

:selected: :selected:

:selected:

:selected:

V[P(N)]/cuu

-2

10

10-1

x 10

10

:unselected: :selected:

:unselected:

:unselected:

:unselected:

JE=9

:unselected: + E=8

0

E=7

x E=6

:selected: E=5

ideal chains

-5L

10-2

10-1

X=uN

10º 101

Fig. 4. Characterization of the deviations of P(N) from Eq. (3) using the functionals (a) V[P(N)] ~ δμε(Ν) and (b) W[P(N)] ~ 2δμς(Ν) - δμς(2Ν) defined in the main text which should both vanish for perfectly Flory distributed ideal chains as indicated by the horizontal lines in the panels. Data points for different scission energies E (as indicated) collapse if V[P(N)]/cpu and W[P(N)]/cup(2-1/2) are plotted as functions of the reduced chain length x = uN. For small x both functionals decay as 1/Vx as shown by the dash-dotted lines. The bold lines correspond to the full predictions Eq. (31) and Eq. (33) for V[P(N)] and W[P(N)], respectively.

Note that u and 1/ (N) become numerically indistinguish- able for E ≥ 7. If the Gaussian contribution to the chemi- cal potential is properly subtracted one expects to obtain directly the non-Gaussian deviation to the chemical po- tential, δμ.(Ν) ~ V[P(N)]. Due to Eq. (6) the functional should thus scale as

V[P(N)]/cuVA&(1-2x)/ Vx

(31)

(30)

with x = UN as indicated by the bold line in the panel. This is well born out by the data collapse obtained up to x ~ 5. Obviously, the statistics detoriates for x >> 1 for all energies due to the exponential cut-off of P(N). Unfor- tunately, the statistics of the length histograms decreases strongly with E and becomes too low for a meaningful comparison for E > 9. It is essentially for this numerical reason that we use Eq. (30) rather than simple large-E limit u = 1/ (N) since this allows us to add the two his- tograms for E = 5 and E = 6 for which high precision data is available. Otherwise these energies would deviate from Eq. (31) for large x due to an insufficient substraction of the leading Gaussian contribution to the chemical poten- tial. Thus we have used to some extend in panel (a) the predicted behavior, Eq. (6), presenting strictly speaking a (highly non-trivial) self-consistency check of the theory.

Eq. (7), we present in panel (a) the functional

(29) V[P(N)] = - log(P(N)) - μN + log(μ)

where the second term takes off the ideal contribution to the chemical potential. The last term is due to the nor- malization of P(N) and eliminates a trivial vertical shift depending on the scission energy E. Consistently with Eq. (21), the chemical potential per monomer u has been obtained from the measured mean chain length (N) using

Since the substraction of the large linear Gaussian con- tribution is in any case a delicate issue we present in panel (b) of Fig. 4 a second functional,

## W[P(N)]= 2V[P(N)] - V[P(2N]



H = (N)-1 (1 +C,VTT/ V(NT).

= log[P(2N)p/P2(N)],

(32)

Wittmer: Non-extensivity of the chemical potential of polymer melts

11

where by construction this contribution is eliminated fol- lowing a suggestion made recently by Semenov and Johner [9]. The normalization factor u appearing in Eq. (32) elim- inates again a weak vertical scission energy dependence of the data. Obviously, W[P(N)] = 0 for perfectly Flory dis- tributed chains. Following Eq. (7) one expects W[P(N)] = 2δμς(Ν) - δμς (2Ν) and due to Eq. (6)

10

100

4

W.

p

5

:selected:

:selected:

0

0

O :unselected:

O :unselected:

O :unselected:

O

:unselected:

O :unselected:

:unselected:

O

5

("5 dm) / dy

:unselected: p=2

:unselected:

p=3

1

:selected:

p=4

:selected: p=5

p

1/<N>

10-1 :unselected:

:selected:

p=6

p=7

:selected:

+

p=8

1/2

C =0.16 u

:selected:

10º

Cu VA(2-1/1/2) W[P(N)] ≈ 1-0.906x √ x

101

<N> 102

103

(33)

Fig. 5. Non-exponentiality parameter Kp for different mo-

with x = uN. Eq. (33) is indicated by the bold line which compares again rather well with the presented data.

The functionals presented in Fig. 4 require histograms with very high accuracy. That P(N) is only approximately Flory distributed can be more readily seen using the "non- exponentiality parameter" Kp = 1 - (NP) /p! (N)P which

ments p as a function of mean chain length (N). Kp is finite decreasing with chain length as suggested by Eq. (23). The ver-

tical axis has been rescaled successfully using the p-dependent weights Wp indicated in the inset.

## 5 Discussion



Summary. Challenging Flory's ideality hypothesis, we have measures how the moments deviate from the Flory distri- bution. Obviously, Kp = 0 for rigorously Gaussian chains. As stated in Eq. (23), we expect the non-exponentiality investigated in this study the scaling of the chemical po- tential of polymer chains with respect to the length n of a tagged test chain plugged into a solution of N-chains parameter to decay as Kp = WpCuyp ~ 1/p(N), i.e. of a given length distribution P(N) with (N) being the as the correlation hole potential of the typical melt chain.

typical length of the chains of the bath. By means of one-loop perturbation calculations we have demonstrated for n < < N)2 the existence of a non-extensive deviation predicted power-law decay is clearly demonstrated by the ouc(n) « 1 with respect to the Gaussian reference. This correction becomes universal for small reduced test chain data. Note that the scaling of the vertical axis with the p-dependent geometrical factors wp allows to bring all mo- ments on the same master curve. As can be seen from the inset of Fig. 5 this scaling is significant since Wp varies over nearly a decade between W2 = VA/2 and w8 ~ 8.6. Deviations from the predicted scaling are visible, not sur- prisingly, for small (N) < 10.

The main panel of Fig. 5 presents Kp/WpCu as a func- tion of (N) ~ 1/u using double-logarithmic axes. The

lengths, x = n/ (N) < 1, scaling as δμε(n) ~ 1/p n ir- respective of the length distribution as suggested by the "correlation hole potential" (Fig. 1(a)). For larger x the correction depends somewhat on P(N), as explicitly dis- cussed for Flory distributed [Eq. (6)] and monodisperse melts [Eq. (27)], but remains generally a monotonously

12

Wittmer: Non-extensivity of the chemical potential of polymer melts

decreasing function of n scaling as

5μc(n)~ ––(1 - Ic(x) with Ic(x) ≤ 0

(34)

changing sign at x ~ 1 (Fig. 2). For the important limit of a test chain of same length as the typical chain of the bath, x = 1, the deviation from Flory's hypothesis decreases in magnitude with n. For Flory distributed or monodis- perse chains Ic(x = 1) > 1 and the asymptotic limit, Pc(n) -> un, is thus approached from below [Eq. (28)]. Note that our predictions are implicit to the theoretical framework put forward by Edwards [2] or Schäfer [3], but to the best of our knowledge they have not been stated explicitly before.

We have confirmed theory by analyzing in Section 4 the length distribution of essentially Flory distributed equi- librium polymers obtained for different scission energies E by Monte Carlo simulation of the BFM at one melt density. Albeit the deviations from Flory's hypothesis are small (Fig. 3(a,b)), they can be demonstrated by analyz- ing - log(P(N)) as shown in Fig. 4 or from the scaling of the non-exponentiality parameter, Kp ~ 1/\(N), for all moments p sampled (Fig. 5). We emphasize that the data collapse on the theoretical predictions, Eqs. (31,33,23), has been achieved without any free adjustable parameter since the coefficient cu is known.

Outlook. Clearly, the presented study begs for a direct Finally, we would like to point out that the presented numerical verification of the suggested non-extensive chem- perturbation calculation for dense polymer chains may ical potential for a test chain inserted into a melt of mono- also be of relevance to the chemical potential of dilute polymer chains at and around the O-point which has re- ceived attention recently [27]. The reason for this connec- disperse chains, Eq. (26). In principle, this should be fea- sible by thermodynamic integration using multihistogram

methods as proposed in [24]. In particular, this may allow to improve the numerical test of the theory for x >> 1; due to the exponential cut-off [Eq. (8)] this regime has been difficult to explore using the equilibrium polymer length distribution (Fig. 4).

Another interesting testing bed for the proposed corre- lation hole effect are polymer melts confined in thin films of width H « R(n) [17]. A logarithmically decreasing non-extensive chemical potential contribution has been predicted for these effectively two-dimensional systems [9,5]. The non-exponentiality parameter of equilibrium poly- mers confined in thin films should thus decay rather slowly with chain length. This is in fact confirmed qualitatively by the numerical results presented in Fig. 6 obtained us- ing again the BFM algorithm with finite scission energy described above. Note that the smallest film width allow- ing the overlap of monomers and the crossing of chains (H = 4) corresponds to an increase of K2 by nearly a decade for the largest chains we have sampled. The de- tailed scaling with H is, however, far from obvious. Larger mean chain lengths and better statistics are warranted to probe the logarithmic behavior for asymptotically long chains predicted by Semenov and Johner [9]. Note that if confirmed this prediction should influence the phase dia- grams of polymer blends in reduced effective dimensions.

Wittmer: Non-extensivity of the chemical potential of polymer melts

13

L=512

H

BFM p=0.5/8

10-1

:selected: *

*

:unselected:

K2

* H=4

:selected: H=7

:selected: H=13

V

:selected:

10-2

:unselected: 3d bulk

-

H=19

0.3/ log(<N>)

A

4

:selected: A

1

101

<N> 102

Fig. 6. Non-exponentiality parameter K2 = 1- (N2) /2 (N)2 as a function of the mean chain length (N) for equilibrium polymers confined between two hard walls at distance H as indicated. The lateral box size is L = 512, the number den- sity p = 0.5/8. In qualitative agreement with theory [9] the non-exponentiality parameter is found to decay much more slowly with (N) as in the bulk (squares), i.e. K2 increases with decreasing H. Note that in the large-(N) limit one expects K2 ~ Hº / log((N)) as indicated by the dashed line.

tion is that (taken apart different prefactors) the same effective interaction potential, Eq. (15), enters the per- turbation calculation in the low wavevector limit. A non- extensive correction duc(n) ~ +1/ yn in three dimensions is thus to be expected.

We thank the Université de Strasbourg, the CNRS, and the ESF-STIPOMAT programme for financial support. We are in- debted to S.P. Obukhov and A.N. Semenov for helpful discus-

## References



1. P.G. de Gennes, Scaling Concepts in Polymer Physics (Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York, 1979)

2. M. Doi, S.F. Edwards, The Theory of Polymer Dynamics (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1986)

3. L. Schäfer, Excluded Volume Effects in Polymer Solutions (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1999)

4. We suppose throughout this paper that P(N) is a realistic polymer length distribution which is not too broad. All moments (NP) 1/P exist and are of same order. Obviously,

all moments of monodisperse melts of length N become (NP) 1/P = N.

5. E. Nikomarov, S. Obukhov, Sov. Phys. JETP 53, 328 (1981)

6. M. Cates, S. Candau, J. Phys. Cond. Matt 2, 6869 (1990)

7. J.P. Wittmer, A. Milchev, M.E. Cates, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 834 (1998)

8. The chain length distribution is obtained by minimizing a Flory-Huggins free energy functional

f[AN] = >pN (log(pN) + μN + E + δμς(Ν)) N

with respect to the density PN = pP(N)/ (N) of chains of length N. The first term on the right is the usual transla- tional entropy. The second term entails a Lagrange multi- plier which fixes the total monomer density p = EN NpN. All contributions to the chemical potential of the chain Uc which are linear in N can be adsorbed within the La- grange multiplier. The scission energy E characterizes the enthalpic free energy cost for breaking a chain bond. The most crucial last term encodes the remaining non-linear contribution plc (N) to the chemical potential ulc which

sions.

14

Wittmer: Non-extensivity of the chemical potential of polymer melts

has to be paid for creating two new chain ends. A rig- orously Flory distributed length distribution implies thus δμς(Ν) = const.

quenched, i.e. if it is allowed to fluctuate or not. This fol- lows from the well-known behavior of fluctuations of exten- sive parameters in macroscopic systems: the relative fluc- tuations vanish as 1/VV as the total volume V > co. The latter limit is taken first in our calculations, i.e. we consider

9. A.N. Semenov, A. Johner, Eur. Phys. J. E 12, 469 (2003)

10. J.P. Wittmer, H. Meyer, J. Baschnagel, A. Johner, S.P. Obukhov, L. Mattioni, M. Müller, A.N. Semenov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 147801 (2004)

an infinite number of (annealed or quenched) chains. The

large-N limit is then taken afterwards to increase the range of the scale free effective interaction potential, Eq. (15).

11. J.P. Wittmer, P. Beckrich, A. Johner, A.N. Semenov, S.P.

Obukhov, H. Meyer, J. Baschnagel, Europhys. Lett. 77, 56003 (2007)

22. M. Abramowitz, I.A. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical Functions (Dover, New York, 1964)

12. P. Beckrich, A. Johner, A.N. Semenov, S.P. Obukhov, H.C. 23. D. Frenkel, B. Smit, Understanding Molecular Simulation Benoît, J.P. Wittmer, Macromolecules 40, 3805 (2007)

- From Algorithms to Applications (Academic Press, San

13. J.P. Wittmer, P. Beckrich, H. Meyer, A. Cavallo, A. Johner, J. Baschnagel, Phys. Rev. E 76, 011803 (2007)

Diego, 2002), 2nd edition 24. M. Müller, W. Paul, J. Chem. Phys. 100, 719 (1994) 25. H. Deutsch, K. Binder, J. Chem. Phys. 94, 2294 (1991)

14. H. Meyer, J.P. Wittmer, T. Kreer, P. Beckrich, A. Johner,

J. Farago, J. Baschnagel, Eur. Phys. E 26, 25 (2008)

15. J.P. Wittmer, A. Cavallo, T. Kreer, J. Baschnagel, A. Johner, J. Chem. Phys. 131, 064901 (2009)

16. J.P. Wittmer, A. Johner, S.P. Obukhov, H. Meyer, A. Cav- allo, J. Baschnagel, Macromolecules (2009)

17. A. Cavallo, M. Müller, J.P. Wittmer, A. Johner, J. Phys .: Condens. Matter 17, S1697 (2005)

18. J.P. Wittmer, P. Beckrich, F. Crevel, C.C. Huang, A. Cav- allo, T. Kreer, H. Meyer, Comp. Phys. Comm. 177, 146 (2007)

19. I. Carmesin, K. Kremer, Macromolecules 21, 2819 (1988)

20. A.N. Semenov, S.P. Obukhov, J. Phys .: Condens. Matter 17, 1747 (2005)

21. The chemical potential of a chain does depend on the length distribution of the melt, Eq. (25). For an infi- nite macroscopically homogeneous systems it is indepen- dent, however, on whether this distribution is annealed or

26. C.C. Huang, H. Xu, F. Crevel, J. Wittmer, J.P. Ryckaert, Reaction kinetics of coarse-grained equilibrium polymers: a Brownian Study, in Computer Simulations in Condensed Matter: from Materials to Chemical Biology (Springer, Lect. Notes Phys., International School of Solid State Physics, Berlin/Heidelberg, 2006), Vol. 704, pp. 379-418 27. D. Shirvanyants, S. Panyukov, Q. Liao, M. Rubinstein, Macromolecules 1, 1475 (2008)

