# Influence of Solvent Quality on Conformations of Crowded Polymers

## I. INTRODUCTION



Polymer conformations can be influenced by macro- molecular crowding [1, 2], which occurs when the vol- ume accessible to a macromolecule is reduced by the presence of other macromolecules (crowders) in solution, or by geometric confinement imposed by hard bound- aries [3, 4]. Over the past four decades, this phenomenon has drawn increasing interest within the biophysics com- munity for its ubiquity in cellular and other biological environments [5-13]. Inside cells, macromolecules oc- cupy up to 20% of the volume of the cytoplasm and up to 40% of the volume of the nucleoplasm [14, 15]. Excluded-volume interactions with crowders influences the conformational and diffusional behavior of biopoly- mers (proteins, RNA, DNA) within cells [4, 16] and can significantly modify biomolecular processes, such as pro- tein folding [17]. Macromolecular crowding also has been implicated in promoting polymer aggregation associated with cataract formation [18] and in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's dis- ease [19]. Closely related is the confinement of polymers by nanoparticles in nanocomposite materials [20-26].

arXiv:1809.08090v1 [cond-mat.soft] 21 Sep 2018

The impact of crowding on biopolymer structure and function has been investigated in a variety of modeling and experimental studies [27-39]. For example, in a se- ries of computational studies [32-35], the structure and function of RNA were shown to be strongly influenced by crowding. Recent experiments combined fluorescence microscopy and particle tracking methods to show that DNA conformations and mobility respond to crowding by dextran (mimicing cytoplasm conditions) [36, 37]. Other experiments showed that crowding by dextran or polyethylene glycol (PEG) influences the stability and

* alan.denton@ndsu.edu

folding of actin [38]. Diffusion NMR and neutron scat- tering were used to probe the size (radius of gyration) of PEG in aqueous solution with Ficoll 70 crowders [39]. While many such studies have explored the impact of crowding on polymer size, relatively few thus far have addressed the influence of crowding on polymer shape.

The significance of aspherical polymer conformations was recognized by Kuhn [40], who pointed out that the gross shape of a linear polymer, when viewed from a refer- ence frame tied to the principal axes of the chain, matches that of an elongated, flattened ellipsoid. A linear poly- mer chain can be realistically modeled by a random walk, whose steps are analogous to polymer segments. Math- ematical studies have demonstrated that an ensemble of random walks, analogous to an ensemble of polymer con- formations, can be characterized by statistical distribu- tions of size and shape [41-48]. The conformations of a random walk (or polymer chain) can be quantified by the gyration tensor, whose eigenvalues (in the principal axis frame) determine the radius of gyration and the principal radii of a general ellipsoid.

Early statistical mechanical studies of an ideal polymer (i.e., in a theta (0) solvent), modeled as a freely-jointed, segmented chain or a random walk (RW) of independent steps, yielded accurate approximations [49-52], and an exact expression [53, 54], for the probability distribu- tion of the radius of gyration. Subsequent simulation studies produced accurate fitting formulas for the distri- butions of the gyration tensor eigenvalues of ideal (RW) polymers [55-57] and nonideal, self-avoiding walk (SAW) polymers [58].

The influence of solvent on excluded-volume interac- tions between segments of a polymer in a dilute solution, and in turn on scaling with segment number N (or molec- ular weight) of the average radius of gyration Rg is well understood [59, 60]. A polymer in a 0 solvent, mod- eled by a random walk, has Rg ~ N1/2, while a polymer in a good solvent, modeled by a self-avoiding walk, has

Rg ~ N3/5 (roughly). For polymers in crowded envi- ronments, however, the influence of solvent on size and shape distributions is relatively poorly understood [61]. In previous work, we studied the influence of nanopar- ticle crowding on the conformations of polymers in 0 sol- vents - specifically, the radius of gyration distribution within a spherical polymer model [62] and the shape dis- tribution within the ellipsoidal polymer model [63-65]. The purpose of the present paper is to investigate the influence of solvent quality (good vs. 0) on the confor- mations of crowded polymers. By comparing data from molecular simulations with predictions from free-volume theory, we demonstrate the importance of solvent quality for the sizes and shapes of crowded polymers. In Sec. II, we review the coarse-grained model of polymers as soft, penetrable ellipsoids. In Sec. III, we outline our computa- tional methods: Monte Carlo simulation and free-volume theory. In Sec. IV, we present and interpret results for shape distributions and average geometric properties of crowded polymers in good solvents. Finally, in Sec. V, we conclude and suggest possible extensions of our work.

## II. MODELS



## A. Coarse-Grained Model of Polymer Coil



FIG. 1. Model of a linear polymer coil (red chain) ap- proximated as a general ellipsoid that fluctuates in size and shape according to random-walk statistics and is penetrable by hard-sphere nanoparticles (blue spheres).

To efficiently explore the influence of nanoparticle crowding on the conformations of polymers in good sol- vents, we adopt a coarse-grained model of a polymer as a fluctuating ellipsoid whose shape distribution is governed by the gyration tensor of a self-avoiding walk (Fig. 1):

N

T = :selected:

i=1 ~ Eriri, (1)

2

where ri is the position relative to the center of mass of segment (step) i of N total segments. The eigenvalues of the gyration tensor - A1, A2, A3 in three dimensions - determine the radius of gyration of the polymer in a particular conformation:

Rp = i N r = VA1+ 42+43. (2)

N

1/2

1

i=1

(For reference, the gyration tensor relates to the moment of inertia tensor I via T = R31 - I, with unit tensor 1.) The root-mean-square (rms) radius of gyration, which can be measured in scattering experiments, is given by

Rg = {R} = V(A1 + 2 + A3) , (3)

where the angular brackets denote an ensemble average over polymer conformations.

If the ensemble average in Eq. (3) is defined relative to a frame of reference that rotates with the polymer's principal axes and, furthermore, the principal axes are labelled to preserve the order of the eigenvalues from largest to smallest (A1 > A2 > A3), then the average tensor describes an anisotropic object [45, 46]. The eigen- values of the gyration tensor define an ellipsoid,

12 +2+2 = 3, (4)

where (x, y, z) are the coordinates of a point on the sur- face and the eigenvalues relate to the principal radii Ri via Aj = R2/3 (i = 1, 2, 3). This general ellipsoid is a coarse-grained representation of the average shape of the polymer (e.g., the tertiary structure of a biopolymer). Each triplet of eigenvalues {A1, A2, A3} characterizes a unique polymer conformation and ellipsoid shape.

In the absence of crowders, a three-dimensional SAW, modeling conformations of a linear polymer in a good solvent, has an average shape (eigenvalue) distribution determined by Monte Carlo simulations [58] to be accu- rately described by a probability distribution,

3

Po(A1, A2, A3) = ]] Pio (Ai) , i=1

(5)

where the three factors are given by

Pio (Ai) 1 Vi T(vi) Qi (VA)" exp (- Vidi

Vi-1

(6)

and ai and vi are fit parameters, tabulated in Table I for polymer chains of length N = 104. The factorized form of Eq. (5) assumes independent eigenvalues - aside from the ordering condition - an assumption that proves ac- curate for sufficiently long polymers, with the exception of rare conformations in which an extreme extension in one direction can affect the probability of an extension in an orthogonal direction.

3

TABLE I. Parameters for shape distribution in Eq. (6) [58] for polymer chains of length N = 104.



|eigenvalue i||Vi|T(vi)|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|7591.0120|3.35505|2.84226|
|2|1604.3861||15.8132|
|3|544.16323|5.84822|92.8188|


and

Ri(di, Øc) = C Rg(0) V3X; = 3.9269Rg(0) VÀi. (12) For comparison, in a 0 solvent, Ri = Rg(0)\/18\¿ and Rg (c) = Rg(0) 6 (1 + 2 + 13). (13) The principal radii determine the average volume of the ellipsoidal polymer via

TABLE II. Parameters for shape distribution in Eq. (7).



|eigenvalue i|ai|bị|Ci|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|11847.9|2.35505|22.3563|
|2|1.11669×109|3.71698|148.715|
|3|1.06899×1014|4.84822|543.619|


100

1

An uncrowded SAW polymer of N segments, each of (Kuhn) length l, has rms (average) radius of gyration Rg(0) = CNul, with Flory exponent v = 0.588 and am- plitude C = 0.44108 [58]. For comparison, in a 0 solvent, Rg(0) = \N/6 l. Since the gyration tensor eigenvalues increase with N in proportion to N24, it is convenient to define scaled eigenvalues, A¿ = Ai/(Nul)2, in terms of which the shape distribution can be expressed as

P(2, ¢=0)

50

Up(A1, A2, 13, Qc) = (R1R2R3) .

(14)

8

--

Nz

6

1

1

P (Ap, Pc=0)

1

4

SAW

RW

2

0

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

2

0.4

0.5

λ

Pio(Ai) = a ¿¿ exp(-cidi) ,

(7)

where the parameters ai, bi, and ci, derived from di and Vi, are tabulated in Table II. The individual eigenvalue distributions differ somewhat from the factors in Eqs. (6) and (7). Each is obtained from the parent distribution [Eq. (5)] by integrating over the other two eigenvalues, with limits set by eigenvalue ordering (>1 > >> > >3):

0

10

0.05

0.1

λ

FIG. 2. Probability distributions P(A) of scaled gyration tensor eigenvalues > = {\1, 2, 3} of uncrowded polymers (¢c = 0) in a good solvent (SAW, solid curves) and in a 0 solvent (RW, dashed curves). Inset: largest eigenvalue À1 distributions.

PI(1)= dd2 0 d\3 Po(X) ,

(8)

The deviation of a polymer's average shape from spher- ical is conveniently quantified by an asphericity parame- ter [45, 46], defined as

∞

P2(X2) = 12

12

d\3 Po(A) ,

(9)

0

00 11

P3(\3) = 13 13

dx1 d\2 Po(A) ,

(10)

where I = {\1, 12, 13} represents a triplet of scaled eigen- values. For comparison, Fig. 2 shows the scaled eigen- value distributions of uncrowded polymers in good and 0 solvents. Note that, accounting for the different scaling factors - N for RW polymers, but N1.176 for SAW poly- mers - the unscaled eigenvalues are significantly larger for a SAW polymer in a good solvent than for a RW polymer in a 0 solvent.

Amidst crowders of volume fraction de, the rms radius of gyration Rg(Pc) and the principal radii Ri(Pc) are re- lated to the scaled eigenvalues via

Rg(X1, 12, 13, (c) = (1 +2 +13)

(11)

A=1-3 «(>1 + 12 + 13)2) (X112 +11/3 +12/3) . (15)

A perfect sphere has all eigenvalues equal and A = 0, while an elongated object with one eigenvalue much larger than the others has A ~ 1. Crowding agents mod- ify the eigenvalue probability distributions and, in turn, the rms radius of gyration and asphericity of a polymer.

As in our previous studies of crowding of RW poly- mers in a 0 solvent [63-65], our model extends the classic Asakura-Oosawa-Vrij (AOV) model of colloid-polymer mixtures [66, 67], which idealizes nonadsorbing polymers as effective spheres of fixed size (radius of gyration). Al- though qualitatively describing depletion-induced demix- ing of colloid-polymer mixtures, the AOV model com- pletely neglects polymer conformational fluctuations, the influence of crowding on polymer size and shape, and the penetrability of polymers by smaller colloids (nanoparti- cles). We investigate polymer crowding within an ex- tended model of polymer-nanoparticle mixtures that in- cludes all of these features.

B. Polymer Penetration Model

To allow for penetration of polymers by crowders, we further extend the AOV model, following previous work [63-65, 68], by defining an average penetration free energy & that represents the average loss in conforma- tional entropy of a polymer upon penetration by a hard- nanosphere crowder of radius Rc (see Fig. 1). The de- pendence of & on q can be motivated from a simple scal- ing argument for an uncrowded polymer in the N > 00 (q >> 1) limit [59]. Given that & should be proportional to both the fraction of polymer volume occupied by the nanosphere and the number of polymer segments, we make the scaling ansatz,

BE ~ RC Y (g) ,

(16)

Up

where the scaling function Y (q) is proportional to N. Since N ~ [Rg(0)]1/" in a good solvent, it follows that Y(q) ~ q1/", which implies

(17) Up BE~ Re q1/v ~ Ro (0) q1/v-3 ,

Up

where q = Rg(0)/Rc is the uncrowded polymer-to- crowder size ratio. For a SAW polymer in a good solvent at temperature T, polymer field theory [69-72] predicts v = 0.588 and, in the limit in which the crowders are much smaller than the polymers (q >> 1):

βε ~

Upq1.29932 18.4R3(0) .

(18)

For q ≤ 1, nanosphere insertions are so costly in free en- ergy that the polymer is practically impenetrable. Crow- ders then influence the polymer shape mostly from out- side. Conversely, for q >> 1, penetration is less costly and crowding can occur from both inside and outside the polymer. If the polymer were approximated as a sphere of fixed radius, we would have Up = (4T/3) R3(0) and

4.4 BE = 91. 2932 '

(19)

an expression that has been used in previous studies of colloid-polymer mixtures in the q >> 1 limit [73]. In our study, however, we used the more general expression of Eq. (18), which applies to a polymer of arbitrary shape. In comparison, for a RW polymer, BE ~ 4TR3(0)/ (qUp), reducing to BE ~ 3/q in the spherical polymer model.

The coarse-grained ellipsoidal polymer model should be reasonable if, in the time required for the crowders to significantly change their configuration, the polymer has sufficient time to equilibrate by visiting a representa- tive sample of its possible conformations. We must then assume a separation of time scales between diffusion of crowders and conformational rearrangement of the poly- mer. For purposes of a rough estimate, we assume that

4

a statistically independent configuration of crowders is achieved when each crowder diffuses a distance compara- ble to its diameter, while the polymer conformation equi- librates in the time it takes for each segment to diffuse a distance comparable to the segment length. Equat- ing these distances - presuming similar diffusion rates - gives a lower limit on the allowed size of a crowder (up- per limit on q) for which the model is reasonable. This simple estimate yields q ~ N/6 for a RW polymer and q ~ CN" for a SAW polymer. Thus, for most practi- cal purposes, and certainly for the systems considered in Sec. IV, the coarse-grained ellipsoidal polymer model is quite justified.

## III. METHODS



## A. Monte Carlo Simulation



Adapting methods developed in previous studies of polymer crowding [63-65], we simulated a single ellip- soidal polymer, fluctuating in conformation according to the model described in Sec. IIA, immersed in a fluid of hard nanospheres. In the canonical ensemble, with fixed numbers of particles at constant temperature in a cubic cell of fixed volume with periodic boundary con- ditions, we implemented a variation of the Metropolis Monte Carlo (MC) algorithm. Trial displacements of nanospheres and polymers were performed by translat- ing the center of a particle at position (x, y, z) to a new position (x + Ax, y + Ay, z + Az), where Ax, Ay, and Az were chosen independently and randomly in the range [-0.2Rc, 0.2Rc].

Trial displacements of polymers were coupled with trial rotations and shape changes as a single composite move. To ensure uniform sampling of the polymer orientation, defined by a unit vector u aligned with the long axis of the ellipsoid, we generated a new orientation Unew from an old orientation uola via [74]

Unew

, (20)

Uold + TV| Uold + TV

where v is a randomly oriented unit vector and the toler- ance T was chosen randomly in the range [-0.1, 0.1]. Trial variations in polymer shape were performed by changing one set of gyration tensor eigenvalues Hold = {\1, 12, 13} to a new set Anew = {>1 + 4/1, \2 + 412, \3 + 4\3}, where A\1, 42, and A13 were chosen independently and randomly in the ranges [-0.01, 0.01], [-0.003, 0.003], and [-0.001, 0.001]. A trial move (displacement, rota- tion, and shape change) was accepted with probability

Pacc = min Po(Aold) Po(Anew) e-BAF, 1} , (21)

where AF is the change in free energy resulting from the change in number of particle overlaps. For the polymer- nanosphere penetration energy, we used Eq. (18) with the

polymer volume predicted by free-volume theory. While in principle we should iterate until Up computed from the simulation equals Up predicted by the theory, in prac- tice the theory proved sufficiently accurate that no itera- tions were required. A trial move resulting in overlap of hard nanospheres (yielding infinite AF) was immediately rejected. A move that creates/eliminates a polymer- nanosphere overlap yields AF = +& (see Sec. II B).

During a simulation, we checked whether a trial move resulted in overlap of a nanosphere with the polymer. For each candidate - identified as a nanosphere whose cen- ter lies inside a sphere centered on the ellipsoid of radius equal to the sum of the nanosphere radius and the longest principal radius of the ellipsoid - we diagnosed overlap by computing the closest distance between the nanosphere center and the surface of the ellipsoid, which involves computing the roots of a 6th-order polynomial [75]. Af- ter an accepted change in polymer conformation, we re- ordered the eigenvalues by size. During each simulation, we averaged over MC steps, a step being defined as a trial displacement of every nanosphere and a trial change in polymer conformation, to compute ensemble averages of eigenvalue distributions and polymer geometric prop- erties (see Sec. IV). We coded our simulations in Java within the Open Source Physics Library [76]. Figure 3 shows a typical snapshot from a simulation.

FIG. 3. Snapshot of a simulation of Nn = 216 nanospheres (blue spheres) and one polymer (red ellipsoid) in a cubic sim- ulation cell. The rms radius of gyration of the uncrowded polymer equals five times the nanosphere radius (q=5).

5

## B. Free-Volume Theory of Crowding



To guide choices of system parameters and to help interpret our simulation results, we adapted a free- volume theory previously developed for colloid-polymer mixtures [63-65]. The theory generalizes the theory of Lekkerkerker et al. [77] from the AOV model [66, 67] of hard, spherical polymers to a model of soft, penetrable, aspherical polymers, as described in Sec. II.

The free-volume theory approximates the mean value of a quantity Q(A), averaged over polymer shapes, by

(Q) = d×1 d\2 1. d\3 Q(A)P(A, pc), (22)

0

where

P(\, ¢c) = a(\, ¢c) Po(2) (23)

Ceff (Pc)

is the shape probability distribution of the crowded poly- mer, a(\, dc) is the free-volume fraction of a polymer of shape A = {\1, 12, 13} amidst hard nanospheres of aver- age volume fraction Øc, and

def( pc) = d×1 0 d\2 d\3 @(\, pc) Po(A) 0

(24) is the effective free-volume fraction, averaged over poly- mer shapes. Note that the limits of the eigenvalue in- tegrals in Eqs. (22) and (24) are chosen to respect the eigenvalue ordering (>1 > >> > >3). Previous studies of crowding of RW (ideal) polymers [63-65] did not impose eigenvalue ordering. While this simple approximation proves very accurate and efficient for RW polymers, it turns out to be less accurate for SAW polymers, increas- ingly so with increasing crowder volume fraction.

According to the Widom particle insertion theo- rem [78], the free-volume fraction is related to the av- erage work W required to insert a polymer of shape A into a sea of hard spheres of volume fraction pc via

a(\, pc) = exp[-BW(\, pc)] . (25)

The average insertion work or, equivalently, the free en- ergy required to distort the hard-sphere fluid and create the volume and interfacial area sufficient to accommodate the polymer, can be expressed as

W(x,(c) = p(c)up(A) + + d.S r(c,r) , (26)

where p and y are the pressure and interfacial tension of the hard-sphere fluid, respectively, vp(A) is the volume of the polymer, and the integral is over a closed surface S, defined by the surface of the ellipsoidal polymer and parametrized by surface position vector r. This expres- sion conveniently and conceptually separates thermody- namic properties of the hard-sphere fluid from geometric properties of the polymer.

Assuming a smooth interface between the polymer and the hard-sphere fluid, the interfacial tension, which de- pends on the curvature of the interface - dictated by the polymer shape - can be expanded in powers of the mean curvature

1

1 + 1

K(r) = 2 R1(r)

(27) and the Gaussian curvature

R2(r)

1

H(r) =

(28) ,

R1(r) R2(r)

where R1(r) and R2(r) are the local radii of curvature at a point r on the interface. Thus,

Y(Pc,r) = 100(Pc) + K(c)K(r) +K(c) H(r) + ... , (29)

where Too is the interfacial tension of a flat interface (with infinite radii of curvature) and the coefficients K(pc) and k(pc) are bending rigidities of the hard-sphere fluid, which depend only on the hard-sphere volume fraction. Substituting Eq. (29) into Eq. (26) and integrating over eigenvalues yields the curvature expansion of the inser- tion work:

W (A, (c) = p(c) Up (A) + Yoo(Pc) ap (A)

+ K(Pc)cp(A) + 2TK(Pc) + ··· , (30)

where ap (A) is the surface area of the ellipsoidal polymer,

Cp(X) = > d.S K(r) (31)

is the integrated mean curvature, and we have exploited the Gauss-Bonnet theorem:

(32) S $ dS H(r) = 2TX ,

where the Euler characteristic x = 1 for an ellipsoid. Substituting Eq. (30) into Eq. (25) and neglecting higher- order terms in the curvature expansion yields an approx- imation for the polymer free-volume fraction:

a(X,(c) = exp{-B[p(c)Up(A) + Yoo(c)ap(X)

+ K(Pc)cp(A) + 2TF(Pc)]} . (33)

In the limit of an infinitesimally small (point-like) poly- mer coil (> > 0), Up(A), ap(A), and Cp(A) all tend to zero and the free-volume fraction then reduces to 1 - pc, implying that

F(pc) 270 KBT - In(1 - ¢c) .

(34

Finally, to incorporate the penetrability of the polymers, the crowder volume fraction is replaced by an effective

6

volume fraction, d'e = pc(1 - e-BE) [63-65, 68]. Combin- ing Eqs. (33) and (34) yields the final approximation for the polymer free-volume fraction:

a(), (c) = (1 - 0c) exp{-B[p('c) up(X) + 700 (0'c)ap (A)

+ K(+'c)cp(A)]},

(35)

from which mean values follow via Eqs. (22)-(24).

With knowledge of p(c), Yoo (Pc), and K(c) in the curvature expansion of the insertion work [Eq. (30)], the free-volume theory can be implemented to predict the dependence of polymer size and shape on crowding by a hard-sphere fluid. For example, the radius of gyration Rg(pc) can be explicitly computed from

Rg(pc) = Ry (0) | dx P(A, (c) VA1 + 12 + 13 . (36)

To compute the results reported in Sec. IV, we used the accurate Carnahan-Starling expressions for the hard- sphere fluid properties [79, 80]:

Bp(pc) = 4TT R3 30c 1 + ¢c+02-03 (1 - ¢c)3

3 (1 - ¢c)2 + In(1 - ¢c)

pc(2-¢c)

Broo (Pc) = 4Tr R2

BK(Pc) 30c Rc(1 - ¢c) .

(37)

For the integrated mean curvature, we numerically eval- uated the integral in Eq. (31) over a grid of eigenvalues and stored the results in a look-up table for later access.

IV. RESULTS

## A. Simulation Protocol



For several choices of uncrowded polymer-to-crowder size ratio q and crowder volume fraction de, we performed simulations of a polymer coil (modeled as a fluctuating, penetrable ellipsoid) and Nn=216 nanosphere crowders, initialized on a cubic lattice (6 x 6 x 6 array). After an equilibration stage of 5 × 104 MC steps, we collected statistics for the three eigenvalues of the gyration tensor at intervals of 103 MC steps for 104 intervals. For each parameter combination, we ran five independent simu- lations and averaged over runs to obtain statistical er- rors. We ran test simulations for longer times and larger systems to ensure that the system had reached equilib- rium and that finite-size effects were negligible. From the raw eigenvalue data, we obtained probability distri- butions [Eq. (23)] as histograms (see Figs. 4 and 5) and computed average polymer geometric properties: radius of gyration [Eq. (11)], volume [Eq. (14)], and asphericity [Eq. (15)] (see Figs. 6 and 7).

a 100

a)

400

80

TH

60

P1(21,0)

40

q=5

1 0c=0.1

· ¢c=0.2

· ¢ =0.3

- Theory

--

Uncrowded

T

T

300

T

)

c

200

100

20

0

0.02

b)

0.04

0.06

λ,

0.08

0.1

0 0

0.005

b)

200

600

150

H

) c

T

¥ 400

P2(22,ºc

100

P2

T

200

50

0 0

0.01

c)

0.02

22

0.03

0.04 0.05

0

0.005

c)

300

800

I

T

T

THEH

) ·200

) c

600

0

T

T

I

~400

T

100

200

0

0

0.005

I

I

0.01

23

0.015

0.02

00

0.002

FIG. 4. Eigenvalue probability distributions (>1 > >> > >3) of gyration tensor of a crowded polymer coil in a good sol- vent, modeled as a fluctuating, penetrable ellipsoid, governed by self-avoiding-walk statistics. Simulation data (symbols) are compared with predictions of free-volume theory (solid curves) for a single polymer, with uncrowded rms radius of gyration equal to five times the nanoparticle radius (q = 5), amidst Nn = 216 hard nanosphere crowders of volume fraction ¢c = 0.1 (triangles), 0.2 (squares), and 0.3 (circles). Dashed curves show uncrowded (Øc = 0) distributions.

7

q=10

A 0 =0.1

· ¢=0.2

· ¢=0.3

- Theory

Uncrowded

0.01

0.015

2

0.02

0.01

0.015

2,

0.02

0.004

2

0.006

0.008

0.01

FIG. 5. Same as Fig. 4, but for uncrowded polymer-to- nanosphere size ratio q = 10. Notice changes in horizontal and vertical scales.

B. Comparison of SAW and RW Polymers of Equal Uncrowded Size

We first present and discuss results that illustrate the influence of solvent quality on conformations of crowded SAW and RW polymers having the same uncrowded size (radius of gyration). Figures 4 and 5 show our simula- tion results for the eigenvalue probability distributions for q = 5 and q = 10, respectively, over a range of crowder volume fraction. Also shown are predictions of our free-volume theory. Simulation and theory are in reasonable agreement, deviations increasing with Øe as polymer-crowder correlations strengthen, and both pre- dict progressive shifts to lower eigenvalues (smaller prin- cipal radii) and narrowing of the distributions with in- creasing crowder volume fraction. These results reveal that, with increasing Øc, not only do polymer coils tend to contract along each principal axis, but also fluctua- tions in size and shape are suppressed - more so for q = 10 than for q = 5. The slightly larger deviations between theory and simulation at larger q - evident es- pecially at higher Øe - reflect limitations of the theory associated with neglecting higher-order terms in the cur- vature expansion of the interfacial tension [Eqs. (29) and (30)]. These deviations propagate forward and affect the predicted size and shape of the crowded polymer, which depend on averages over the eigenvalue distributions.

Figure 6 illustrates the influence of crowding on geo- metric properties of a polymer coil. The average radius of gyration, volume, and asphericity of the polymer all decrease monotonically with increasing crowder volume fraction. Polymers of uncrowded Rg equal to the crow- der radius (q = 1) are relatively insensitive to crowding, experiencing only a 15% reduction in size at pc = 0.3, while larger polymers (q = 5, 10) contract significantly more than smaller polymers at the same Øe. The crowd- ing effect predicted at q = 1, though relatively weak, is stronger than that determined from the experiments of ref. [39], in which no significant change in radius of gyration was observed over the same range of Øc. Al- though its source is unclear, this quantitative disagree- ment may result from some mismatch between our model and the experimental system. It may be, for example, that the conformational statistics exhibited by the poly- mer (PEG) in water are not quite those of a SAW, or that the interactions between crowding agents (Ficoll 70) differ from hard-sphere interactions, or that the polymer- crowder interactions are not purely entropic.

The tendency of polymer contraction to increase with increasing q, at fixed oc, is a result of the free energy cost associated with penetration of a polymer by crow- ders. Figure 7 illustrates more directly the variation of polymer geometry with size ratio, showing that radius of gyration, volume, and asphericity all decrease monotoni- cally with increasing q. Evidently, the larger the polymer relative to the crowder, the more severe the influence of crowding on polymer conformation. This trend can be explained by the fact that the total penetration energy

8

scales as q1/v = q1.7 for a given Øc. The latter scaling fol- lows from the scaling of the penetration energy as q1/v-3 [Eq. (17)] and the number of penetrating nanospheres per polymer as q3. While our results for the dependence of Rg on pc and q are qualitatively consistent with the measurements of Palit et al. [39] for aqueous solutions of PEG and Ficoll 70, in that polymer contraction increases monotonically with increasing q and Øc, quantitative dif- ferences exist. Future studies may determine whether the discrepancies can be accounted for by the particular chain statistics of PEG in water or by non-hard-sphere interactions between the Ficoll 70 crowders or by other limitations of our model.

Also shown in Figs. 6 and 7 are corresponding predic- tions of free-volume theory for both SAW and RW poly- mers. Results for SAW polymers from simulation and theory generally agree closely, as found also in previous studies of RW polymer [63-65]. For clarity of presenta- tion, we do not include here previously reported simu- lation data for RW polymers, as they are in near-exact agreement with simulation. As noted in Sec. III A, the output values of Up are sufficiently close to the input val- ues (from free-volume theory) that no iterations between simulation and theory were required. We emphasize that imposing ordering of eigenvalues turns out to have neg- ligible effect on the results for RW polymer, but is more significant for SAW polymer, especially at higher Øc.

While polymers in different solvents show qualitatively similar responses to crowding, all geometric measures de- creasing with increasing Øc, there are significant quanti- tative differences. For the same q and @c, a SAW poly- mer (in a good solvent) has a consistently smaller volume [Figs. 6b and 7b] and higher asphericity [Figs. 6c and 7c] than a RW polymer (in a 0 solvent). Thus, a SAW polymer in a crowded environment is more compressed and more elongated than a RW polymer of the same un- crowded size (same q). The comparison of crowded sizes of SAW and RW polymer is somewhat more complicated. Fig. 6a shows that for q = 1 the SAW polymer is con- sistently less contracted over the whole range of crowder volume fraction, while for q = 5 and q = 10, the SAW polymer contracts less at lower Øe, but more at higher Øc. This cross-over with increasing q and Øe in the degree of contraction of SAW and RW polymers reflects a complex interplay between, on the one hand, chain statistics and conformational entropy, and on the other hand, penetra- tion free energy (see Sec. II B). When we consider, how- ever, polymers of the same segment number (molecular weight), rather than the same uncrowded size, the re- sponses of SAW and RW polymers to crowding are more distinct, as we discuss in the next section.

## C. Comparison of SAW and RW Polymers of Equal Segment Number



Thus far, when comparing the crowded conformations (sizes and shapes) of a SAW polymer in a good solvent

9

a)

a

1

1

A ¢ == 0.1

· ¢ =0.2

· $ =0.3

Theory (SAW)

Radius of Gyration Rg($) / Rg(0)

Radius of Gyration R (+) / R (0)

0.5

q=1

q=5

q=10

Theory (SAW)

Theory (RW)

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.5

0

4

Theory (RW)

6

8

10

Crowder Volume Fraction ¢

Polymer-Crowder Size Ratio q

b) 2

b)

1

1.5

1

Polymer Volume v ($ ) / R."(

Polymer Volume v„($) / R3 (0)

1

0.55

--

0.5

0.1

0

0.2

Crowder Volume Fraction

c)

0.3

c

0

4 6

8

10

Polymer-Crowder Size Ratio q

c)

0.5-

0.5

-

0.4

0.4

HH

0.3

Asphericity A

Asphericity A

0.35

1

0.2

0.2

0.1|

0.1

0

0.1

0.2

Crowder Volume Fraction ¢

0

0.3

4

6

8 10

Polymer-Crowder Size Ratio q

FIG. 6. Average geometric properties a polymer (modeled as a fluctuating, penetrable ellipsoid) vs. nanosphere crowder volume fraction dc: (a) rms radius of gyration, (b) volume, (c) asphericity. Simulation data are shown for SAW polymers of uncrowded polymer-to-nanosphere size ratio q = 1 (triangles), q = 5 (circles), and q = 10 (squares). For some points, error bars are smaller than symbols. Corresponding predictions of free-volume theory are shown for SAW polymers (solid curves) and RW polymers (dashed curves).

FIG. 7. Average geometric properties of a polymer (modeled as a fluctuating, penetrable ellipsoid) vs. uncrowded polymer- to-nanosphere size ratio q: (a) radius of gyration, (b) volume, (c) asphericity. Simulation data are shown for SAW polymers and nanosphere crowder volume fraction ¢c = 0.1 (triangles), ¢c = 0.2 (circles), and ¢c = 0.3 (squares). For some points, error bars are smaller than symbols. Corresponding predic- tions of free-volume theory are shown for SAW polymers (solid curves) and RW polymers (dashed curves).

10

with those of a RW polymer in a 0 solvent, we have con- sidered polymers of the same uncrowded radius of gyra- tion (same q value). Since the scaling of Rg (0) with seg- ment number N depends on the solvent quality [59] (see Sec. II A), we have implicitly been comparing polymers of different segment numbers. Our predictions, while of fundamental interest and qualitatively consistent with observed trends, may be difficult to compare with exper- iments in which polymers of the same molecular weight are studied under different solvent conditions. To facili- tate more direct comparisons with experiments, we now compare predictions for polymers of equal segment num- ber in good and 0 solvents.

a)

1

--- q=3 (RW) -- q=7 (SAW)

· Simulation

Radius of Gyration R ( + ) / R (0)

0.5

Given the segment (Kuhn) length l of a linear polymer coil, the radius of a spherical crowder, and the size ratio qRw of a RW polymer in a 0 solvent, the scaling rela- tions (Sec. II A) determine the size ratio qsaw of a SAW polymer of equal segment number in a good solvent:

50

0.1

0.2

0.3

Crowder Volume Fraction ¢

b) 2

qSAW =C6U(Rc/1)20-1q; qRW .

(38)

1.5

As an example, motivated by the recent experiments of Palit et al. [39], we consider aqueous solutions of PEG and Ficoll 70 crowder. Taking the Kuhn length of PEG in water - considered good solvent conditions at room temperature - as l = 7.6 Å [81] (twice the persistence length), the radius of Ficoll 70 as Rc = 55 Å [82], and qRW = 3, we obtain qsaw ~ 7 and N ~ 3000 segments. (For comparison, qsAw = 1 translates into qRw ~ 0.6 and N~120.)

1

Polymer Volume v ($ ) / R. (0)

Figure 8 compares the geometric properties of this polymer in good and 0 solvents. With increasing crow- der volume fraction, the influence of crowding on con- formations of a polymer of a given molecular weight - quantified by radius of gyration, volume, and asphericity - is consistently stronger in a good solvent than in a 0 solvent. These trends are not surprising, given our gen- eral understanding that crowding effects become more prominent with increasing q, and considering that qSAW here exceeds qRw by more than a factor of two. What is perhaps most notable is that the average polymer shape (asphericity), while strongly dependent on crowder vol- ume fraction, is relatively insensitive - compared with average polymer size - to a change in solvent quality. It is worth noting that our Rg VS. Oc data have a sign of curvature (positive) that is opposite that of the experi- mental data [39]. Quantitative comparisons are compli- cated, however, by the relative simplicity of our model and the fact that, for given molecular weights of PEG, the measured uncrowded radii of gyration obey neither RW nor SAW chain statistics.

0.5

0 0

0.1

0.2

0.3

Crowder Volume Fraction ¢

C)

0.5

0.4

0.3

Asphericity A

0.2

0.1-

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

Crowder Volume Fraction

0

0

FIG. 8. Average geometric properties of PEG (modeled as a fluctuating, penetrable ellipsoid) vs. volume fraction pc of Ficoll 70 crowders (modeled as hard spheres) in water. (a) radius of gyration, (b) volume, and (c) asphericity of the poly- mer. Simulation data (symbols) and theoretical predictions (solid curves) for SAW model of a polymer in a good solvent with q ~ 7 are compared with predictions for RW model of the same polymer in a 0 solvent with q = 3 (dashed curves). For both cases, the polymer contains N ~ 3000 segments, comparable to the experiments of ref. [39].

## V. CONCLUSIONS



To summarize, we have investigated the dependence on solvent quality of polymer conformations in crowded environments. For computational efficiency and concep- tual simplicity, we modeled a polymer coil as an effective ellipsoid whose size and shape fluctuate according to the underlying statistics of random walks. Specifically, fluc- tuations of the principal radii follow the probability dis- tributions of the gyration tensor eigenvalues of either a self-avoiding walk - for a polymer in a good solvent - or a random walk - for a polymer in a 0 solvent. Crowders are modeled as hard-sphere nanoparticles that mutually interact via a hard-sphere pair potential and are allowed to penetrate the volume enclosed by polymers with an average free energy cost predicted by field theory.

We implemented this coarse-grained model of polymer- crowder mixtures via Monte Carlo simulation and free- volume theory for polymers in good and 0 solvents. As input to both simulations and theory, we used eigenvalue distributions previously determined from molecular sim- ulations of random walks. Our simulation data indicate that, with increasing crowder volume fraction and un- crowded polymer-to-crowder size ratio q, polymers be- come smaller and more compact (i.e., more spherical), in good agreement with predictions of free-volume theory. While the conformations of SAW and RW polymers dis- play similar qualitative trends, they exhibit significant quantitative differences. For polymers that are equal in either radius of gyration or segment number, the influ- ence of crowding is consistently stronger in a good solvent than in a 0 solvent. This dependence on solvent quality can be attributed to the important role of segment self- avoidance on both the statistics and the penetrability of a polymer chain in a good solvent. Our prediction can be experimentally tested by measuring the radius of gy- ration of polymers in dilute and crowded solutions under

[1] R. J. Ellis, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 11, 114 (2001). [2] R. J. Ellis, Trends in Biochem. Sci. 26, 597 (2001).

[3] A. P. Minton, J. Biol. Chem. 276, 10577 (2001).

[4] C. Jeon, Y. Jung, and B .- Y. Ha, Soft Matter 12, 9436 (2016).

[5] A. P. Minton, Biophys. J. 32, 77 (1980).

[6] A. P. Minton, Biopolymers 20, 2093 (1981).

[7] A. P. Minton, Biophys. J. 78, 101 (2000).

[8] A. P. Minton, Biophys. J. 88, 971 (2005).

[9] K. Richter, M. Nessling, and P. Lichter, J. Cell Sci. 120, 1673 (2007).

[10] K. Richter, M. Nessling, and P. Lichter, Biochim. Bio- phys. Acta 1783, 2100 (2008).

[11] A. H. Elcock, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 20, 1 (2010).

[12] R. Hancock, in Genome Organization and Function in the Cell Nucleus, edited by K. Rippe (Wiley-VCH, Wein- heim, 2012) pp. 169-184.

[13] A. R. Denton, in New Models of the Cell Nucleus: Crowd- ing and Entropic Forces and Phase Separation and Frac- tals, edited by R. Hancock and K. W. Jeon (Academic

11

different solvent conditions, achievable by varying either temperature or concentration of a cosolvent.

The model considered here, in which polymer shapes are governed by random-walk statistics and crowders are treated as inert hard spheres, has the virtue of iso- lating and highlighting the role of excluded volume in polymer crowding. Quantitative description of many real systems, however, may require incorporating intra- chain interactions (chain enthalpy), with appropriate un- crowded eigenvalue distributions, crowder-crowder inter- actions, and internal structure of crowders. For exam- ple, real biopolymers may follow different chain statis- tics, while specific crowders may be compressible and, if charged, may mutually interact by screened electrostatic potentials. Moreover, while our model of mobile poly- mers and crowders is designed to apply most closely to macromolecular crowding of biopolymers in cellular en- vironments, a model of polymers amidst fixed obstacles may be more applicable to polymer nanocomposite ma- terials. Future work should investigate the dependence of polymer conformations on chain statistics, crowder- crowder interactions, crowder structure, and crowder mo- bility. Further simulations of more explicit (e.g., bead- spring) models of polymers in crowded environments [32- 35] also would help to test, calibrate, and refine the coarse-grained ellipsoidal polymer model.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS



This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. DMR-1106331. Valuable discussions with Wei Kang Lim and Sylvio May and help- ful correspondence with Sergio J. Sciutto are gratefully acknowledged.

Press, UK, 2013) pp. 27-72.

[14] J. R. C. van der Maarel, Introduction to Biopolymer Physics (World Scientific, Singapore, 2008).

[15] R. Phillips, J. Kondev, and J. Theriot, Physical Biology of the Cell (Garland Science, New York, 2009).

[16] X .- W. Huang, Y. Peng, J .- H. Huang, and M .- B. Luo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 19, 29975 (2017).

[17] M. S. Cheung, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 23, 2012 (2013).

[18] A. Stradner, G. Foffi, N. Dorsaz, G. Thurston, and P. Schurtenberger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 198103 (2007). [19] S. Mittal, R. K. Chowhan, and L. R. Singh, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Gen. Subj. 1850, 1822 (2015).

[20] A. I. Nakatani, W. Chen, R. G. Schmidt, G. V. Gordon, and C. C. Han, Polymer 42, 3713 (2001).

[21] T. Kramer, R. Schweins, and K. Huber,

J. Chem. Phys. 123, 014903 (2005).

[22] T. Kramer, R. Schweins, and K. Huber, Macromol. 38, 151 (2005).

[23] T. Kramer, R. Schweins, and K. Huber, Macromol. 38, 9783 (2005).

[24] A. C. Balazs, T. Emrick, and T. P. Russell, Science 314, 1107 (2006).

[25] M. E. Mackay, A. Tuteja, P. M. Duxbury, C. J. Hawker, B. Van Horn, Z. Guan, G. Chen, and R. S. Krishnan, Science 311, 1740 (2006).

[26] K. Nusser, S. Neueder, G. J. Schneider, M. Meyer, W. Pyckhout-Hintzen, L. Willner, A. Radulescu, and D. Richter, Macromol. 43, 9837 (2010).

[27] D. P. Goldenberg, J. Mol. Biol. 326, 1615 (2003).

[28] R. I. Dima and D. Thirumalai, J. Phys. Chem. B 108, 6564 (2004).

[29] M. Cheung, D. Klimov, and D. Thirumalai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci 102, 4753 (2005).

[30] E. Chen, A. Christiansen, Q. Wang, M. S. Cheung, D. S. Kliger, and P. Wittung-Stafshede, Biochem. 51, 9836 (2012).

[31] A. Linhananta, G. Amadei, and T. Miao, J. Phys .: Conf. Ser. 341, 012009 (2012).

[32] N. A. Denesyuk and D. Thirumalai, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 11858 (2011).

[33] N. A. Denesyuk and D. Thirumalai, Biophys. Rev. 5, 225 (2013).

[34] N. A. Denesyuk and D. Thirumalai, J. Phys. Chem. B 117, 4901 (2013).

[35] H. Kang, P. A. Pincus, C. Hyeon, and D. Thirumalai, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 068303 (2015).

[36] C. D. Chapman, S. Gorczyca, and R. M. Robertson- Anderson, Biophys. J. 108, 1220 (2015).

[37] S. M. Gorczyca, C. D. Chapman, and R. M. Robertson- Anderson, Soft Matter 11, 7762 (2015).

[38] I. A. Gagarskaia, O. I. Povarova, V. N. Uversky, I. M. Kuznetsova, and K. K. Turoverov, J. Mol. Struct. 1140, 46 (2017).

[39] S. Palit, L. He, W. A. Hamilton, A. Yethiraj, and A. Yethiraj, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 097801 (2017).

[40] W. Kuhn, Kolloid-Zeitschrift 68, 2 (1934).

[41] M. Fixman and W. H. Stockmayer, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 21, 407 (1970).

[42] K. Šolc, J. Chem. Phys. 55, 335 (1971).

[43] K. Šolc, Macromol. 6, 378 (1973).

[44] D. N. Theodorou and U. W. Suter, Macromol. 18, 1206 (1985).

[45] J. Rudnick and G. Gaspari, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 19, L191 (1986).

[46] J. Rudnick and G. Gaspari, Science 237, 384 (1987).

[47] M. Bishop and C. J. Saltiel, J. Chem. Phys. 88, 6594 (1988).

[48] M. Bishop, J. H. R. Clarke, A. Rey, and J. J. Freire, J. Chem. Phys. 94, 4009 (1991).

[49] M. Fixman, J. Chem. Phys. 36, 306 (1962).

[50] P. J. Flory and S. Fisk, J. Chem. Phys. 44, 2243 (1966).

[51] M. E. Fisher, J. Chem. Phys. 44, 616 (1966).

[52] P. J. Flory, Statistical Mechanics of Chain Molecules (Wiley, New York, 1969).

[53] H. Fujita and T. Norisuye, J. Chem. Phys. 52, 1115 (1970).

12

[54] H. Yamakawa, Modern Theory of Polymer Solutions (Harper & Row, New York, 1970).

[55] S. J. Sciutto, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 27, 7015 (1994).

[56] M. Murat and K. Kremer, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 4340 (1998).

[57] F. Eurich and P. Maass, J. Chem. Phys. 114, 7655 (2001).

[58] S. J. Sciutto, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 29, 5455 (1996).

[59] P. G. de Gennes, Scaling Concepts in Polymer Physics (Cornell, Ithaca, 1979).

[60] D. Lhuilier, J. Phys. France 49, 705 (1988).

[61] S. Gooßen, A. R. Brás, W. Pyckhout-Hintzen, A. Wis- chnewski, D. Richter, M. Rubinstein, J. Roovers, P. J. Lutz, Y. Jeong, T. Chang, and D. Vlassopoulos, Macro- mol. 48, 1598 (2015).

[62] B. Lu and A. R. Denton, J. Phys .: Condens. Matter 23, 285102 (2011).

[63] W. K. Lim and A. R. Denton, J. Chem. Phys. 141, 114909 (2014).

[64] W. K. Lim and A. R. Denton, J. Chem. Phys. 144, 024904 (2016).

[65] W. K. Lim and A. R. Denton, Soft Matter 12, 2247 (2016).

[66] S. Asakura and F. Oosawa, J. Chem. Phys. 22, 1255 (1954).

[67] A. Vrij, Pure & Appl. Chem. 48, 471 (1976). [68] M. Schmidt and

M. Fuchs,

J. Chem. Phys. 117, 6308 (2002).

[69] E. Eisenriegler, A. Hanke, and S. Dietrich, Phys. Rev. E 54, 1134 (1996).

[70] A. Hanke, E. Eisenriegler, and S. Dietrich, Phys. Rev. E 59, 6853 (1999).

[71] E. Eisenriegler, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 5091 (2000).

[72] E. Eisenriegler, A. Bringer, and R. Maassen, J. Chem. Phys. 118, 8093 (2003).

[73] P. G. Bolhuis, E. J. Meijer, and A. A. Louis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 068304 (2003).

[74] D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding Molecular Simu- lation, 2nd ed. (Academic, London, 2001).

[75] J. C. Hart, in Graphics Gems IV, edited by P. S. Heckbert (Academic, San Diego, 1994) pp. 113-119.

[76] H. Gould, J. Tobochnik, and W. Christian, Introduc- tion to Computer Simulation Methods (Addison Wesley, 2006).

[77] H. N. W. Lekkerkerker, W. C .- K. Poon, P. N. Pusey,

A. Stroobants, and P. B. Warren, Europhys. Lett.) 20, 559 (1992).

[78] B. Widom, J. Chem. Phys. 39, 2808 (1963).

[79] S. M. Oversteegen and R. Roth, J. Chem. Phys. 122, 214502 (2005).

[80] J .- P. Hansen and I. R. McDonald, Theory of Simple Liq- uids, 3rd ed. (Elsevier, London, 2006).

[81] H. Lee, R. M. Venable, A. D. Mackerell, and R. W. Pastor, Biophys. J. 95, 1590 (2008).

[82] B. van den Berg, R. Wain, C. M. Dobson, and R. J. Ellis, EMBO J. 19, 3870 (2000).

