# Understanding and modeling polymers: The challenge of multiple scales

## I. INTRODUCTION



Multiscale problems are omnipresent in materi- als science. The properties of most materials typ- ically result from a combination of many processes on vastly different length and time scales, ranging from electronic excitations and atomic or molecular vibrations on the Angstrom and femtosecond scale to material fatigue on time scales over several years. In polymeric systems, disentangling the different char- acteristic scales scales that determine their behav- ior is particularly difficult. This is because the rele- vant molecular length scales - which range from the scale of the local chemical monomer structure to the scale of chain conformations - strongly overlap with the relevant length scales of the next level of inter- molecular and possibly supra-molecular organiza- tion, and these in turn overlap with the length scales of continuum mechanics on which materials are de- scribed in terms of elastohydrodynamic equations. Therefore, an all-inclusive, comprehensive modeling of a polymeric system [1] remains a formidable chal- lenge despite decades of theoretical efforts [2-16].

arXiv:2212.08945v1 [physics.chem-ph] 17 Dec 2022

In the present perspective article, we discuss some selected approaches to this problem, focussing on re- cent developments. Before doing so, we will quote a few examples of scale-bridging phenomena in poly- mers that inherently require multiscale descriptions.

The first and most basic example is the emerg- ing viscoelasticity and viscoplasticity in polymer rheology, a field where the multiscale character of polymer-based systems is immediately apparent [17]. Polymeric materials respond to applied stress with some time delay (memory), a clear signature of an incomplete separation of time scales. This is because the time scales of intramolecular (internal chain) re- laxation cannot be separated from the time scales of

* friederike.schmid@uni-mainz.de

diffusion and intermolecular re-organization, in par- ticular in the presence of entanglements [6].

Another prominent classical multiscale phe- nomenon in polymer science is polymer crystalliza- tion [18], which involves local crystallization on the monomer scale, the formation of crystalline lamel- lae on the mesoscale, and the macroscale organi- zation of lamellae, often into spherulites [19]. Al- ready the local structure is not necessarily unique [20], but may result from a competition of several polymorphs depending on the processing [21]. Pre- dicting such polymorphs requires accurate theoreti- cal descriptions at the electronic structure level [19] as well as multiscale modelling approaches to en- able studying the kinetics of self-assembly [22, 23]. On the mesoscale, the mechanisms that determine and eventually constrain the growth of crystalline lamellae are still under debate [24]. One particu- lar intriguing phenomenon is the "melt memory" ef- fect [25, 26]: Even after melting a polymer crystal, the melt retains some knowledge about the previous structure and tends to re-crystallize at previously crystalline positions after cooling. Recent system- atic simulation studies by Luo, Sommer and oth- ers have suggested that the thickness of crystalline lamellae is determined by the entanglement length in the melt prior to crystallization [27-32] - consis- tent with the experimental observation that the time scale on which the melt memory survives roughly matches the time scale of re-entanglement kinetics [33]. Such findings illustrate how mesoscale struc- ture (entanglements) can have a profound effect on local structure (local packing), and vice versa, in polymers. The associated time scales can be very large, which offers unusually versatile opportunities to control local structure by processing [34], for ex- ample, in flow-induced crystallization [35-39], or by tiny chemical modifications [40, 41]. On the other hand, the mesoscale structure and dynamics deter- mines the elastic and plastic response of the materi- als to deformations [42, 43] and the inhomogeneous

stress fields in the materials, which in term drive the large-scale structure formation and spherulite growth [44].

The interplay of multiple scales also determines the structural and dynamic properties of other mul- tiphase polymer materials [45] that are highly het- erogeneous and filled by internal interfaces, such as polymer blends [46, 47], block copolymer melts and solutions [48-51], or foams [52]. It is particularly prominent in polymer nanocomposites [53-57], where fillers are introduced, e.g., to improve the mechani- cal properties of a polymeric matrix. The molecular origins of the resulting mechanical reinforcement are diverse, they include a redistribution of strain in the polymer matrix [58] as well as stretching of chains at the interfaces [59]. A detailed knowledge of the structure of the material on both local and meso- scopic scales is thus necessary to understand the macroscopic viscoelastic properties of the materials. Likewise, transport properties such as the thermal conductivity [60] depend on the microscopic struc- ture in the bulk matrix as well as at interfaces, i.e., the Kapitza resistance [61, 62], and on the mesoscale shape and spatial distribution of the fillers.

Finally, biomaterials provide some of the most so- phisticated polymer-based multiscale materials, due to their characteristic hierarchical structure. A well- known example is is spider silk [63, 64], which also serves as a good example how the properties of such materials crucially depend on the way how they has been processed (in this case spun) [65]. Other exam- ples are fibers made of collagen, which are abundant in mammals [66-69]. Collagen is found in the ex- tracellular matrix of tissues as different as skin, fas- cia, cartilage and bones, and is to a great extent responsible for their superior material properties. Twenty-nine types of collagen have been reported in the literature [66], the most frequent being colla- gen I, which is present in, e.g., dermis, tendon, and bone. The primary structure of collagen peptides is characterized by repeats of three residues Gly-X- Y, e.g., Gly-Pro-Hyp. The quaternary structure is a triple helix, where three polypeptide strands wrap around each other to form a helix of length ~ 300 nm, the tropocollagen. Staggered arrays of tropocolla- gen self-assemble (spontaneously [70]) to fibrils, the building blocks of fibers (with size roughly 10 um), which then aggregate to even larger structures [71]. Interestingly, the collagen triple helix seems to be only marginally stable, it melts at temperatures just slightly above, or even below the body tempera- ture [72]. This suggests, on the one hand, that the triple helix is stabilized by the fibrillar/microfibrillar suprastructure [70], but also, on the other hand, that collagen frequently unfolds and refolds on a lo- cal scale. The combination of strength and softness

2

would then contribute to the unique material prop- erties of collagen tissues, to their elasticity, and to their capacity to dissipate sudden energy bursts.

In the context of the living tissues, protein fibers are only one building block in the even more com- plex multiscale structures of, e.g., bones [73, 74] or skin [75]. One important aspect of living materials is their dissipative character: They are kept alive by constant energy consumption and thus never reach thermal equilibrium, nor a thermally metastable state, but continuously produce entropy. Promi- nent representatives of such inherently nonequilib- rium materials are protein filament structures which form the cytoskeleton of cells and are responsible for their mechanical elasticity as well as their mo- tion and/or contraction [76, 77]. Another example is the recently discovered phenomenon of liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) in cells [78-85]: Certain proteins mediate the formation of nanosized con- densates in cells - so-called membraneless organelles - which helps to organize cellular content and pos- sibly contributes to gene regulation. Whereas the phase separation itself is driven by thermodynamic interactions, the size and location of the droplets is most likely controlled by nonequilibrium, energy- consuming processes.

These selected examples illustrate the omnipres- ence of multiscale phenomena in polymeric systems, in seemingly simple ones such as one-component polymer melts as well as in complex ones such as functional polymers in a nonequilibrium living mat- ter context. This multiscale character of polymers presents an outstanding challenge for modellers.

Synthetic polymer systems have been among the materials for which systematic multiscale model- ing methods have been developed, which related particle-based coarse-grained models to real poly- mers such as polyethylene [86-91], polycarbonates [92-96], and others [97, 98]. These early studies already addressed key challenges that are still sub- ject of active research today: (i) The coarse-graining procedure, i.e. constructing coarse-grained mod- els using input from quantum chemical calculations and/or atomistic models [86-89, 92-94, 97, 98]; (ii) Reverse backmapping, i.e., the reconstruction of an atomistic configuration from a coarse-grained config- uration [90, 95, 96]; (iii) Dynamic mapping [91, 95], i.e., the question how to extract dynamical informa- tion from the coarse-grained simulations.

Since then, much progress has been made in the field of multiscale modelling of polymers and of soft matter systems in general, and several excellent re- views have highlighted different aspects of the prob- lem, see, e.g., Refs.[4-8, 10, 11, 13-15, 99, 100]. Nevertheless, central challenges still persist. In the present perspective article, we discuss the current

situation in the light of state of the art and recent progress. We begin with a rough outline of mod- els that are used to describe polymeric systems on different scales. Then we discuss a number of scale- bridging strategies that have been developed in the past and have been used for polymeric systems or might be applicable for them. We close with an out- look on open problems for the future.

## II. SCALES IN POLYMERS



To set the stage, we begin with discussing the dif- ferent scales that are involved in our multiscale pic- ture of polymers, and introduce classes of polymer models that are used to study polymer materials on these different scales.

## A. Monomer/Oligomer scale: The scales of chemical specifity



The basic building blocks are the monomers. They can have a simple chemical structure, as in the case of many commodity polymers such as polystyrene, or a rather complicated structure, as in the case of biopolymers such as RNA, DNA, or proteins. The structure of the monomers on the monomer scale determines local properties such as the charges and the polarization, the solubility in a solvent [101], the existence and structure of a hydra- tion shell [102], the local affinity to surfaces [103], or - in studies of polymer reactions, the monomer re- activity [104]. In general, these properties are also influenced by the larger scale structure of polymer systems. For example, the effective monomer re- activity depends on the accessibility of the reactive sites, which is determined not only by the local elec- tronic and steric monomer structure, but also by the polymer conformation [104, 105]. Likewise, the ef- fective charges and/or polarization of monomers de- pend on the local environment [106, 107]. In most cases, however, the corrections due to the larger scale structure are small compared to the intrinsic value imposed by the monomer structure. To study poly- mers on the monomer scale, atomistic models are used, and in some cases quantum mechanical mod- elling is necessary [108, 109].

The next level of organization is the oligomer scale, i.e., the scale of short polymer sections and monomer-monomer interactions. On that scale, co- operativity effects due to non-bonded or bonded interactions between monomers start to become prominent and even dominate. Here, the term "non-bonded" refers to general interactions between monomers of given types, no matter whether or not

3

they belong to the same molecule (e.g., electrostatic interactions or van der Waals interactions), and the "bonded" interactions subsume the additional in- teractions between monomers that are close neigh- bors in the molecule (e.g., chemical bonds, bend- ing or torsional potentials). Emerging properties of interest on the oligomer scale are, e.g., the effec- tive monomer-monomer incompatibility [110], ion- specific effects [111, 112], the propensity to crystal- lize [18], or solvency/cosolvency effects [112, 113]. Again, these properties also depend on the higher order organization, e.g., as has been discussed in the introduction for the case of crystallization. The modelling at this level is still often based on atom- istic force fields, but chemically specific force fields such as the celebrated MARTINI model [114] are starting to become useful, see also the recent re- view by Dhamankar and Webb [14]. In such coarse- grained models, several atoms are lumped into one effective particle, and the (bonded and non-bonded) interactions between particles are determined either in a bottom-up fashion from atomistic simulations, or in a top-down fashion from experimentally acces- sible data, or from a combination of the two. For an overview over coarse-graining approaches, we re- fer to the excellent review of W. Noid [5] (see also below in Sec. III A 1).

## B. Polymer scale: The scale of conformations



The third level, the polymer scale, is the realm of classical polymer physics, where generic statisti- cal mechanics approaches have celebrated successes [17, 115, 116]. At this level, scaling laws have scored victories, both regarding static and dynamic properties of polymeric systems, and simple cal- culations based on "scaling blobs" [116, 117] can make meaningful predictions. This is because poly- mer molecules consisting of many identical monomer units start to exhibit universal behavior beyond a certain molecular weight. Therefore, renormaliza- tion groups concepts can be applied, according to which the fractal large-scale structure of polymer conformations does not depend on details of the lo- cal monomer structure. This results in the paradigm of the "Gaussian chain model" [17], which describes a polymer molecule as a random walk in space. In the case of complex heteropolymer molecules such as intrinsically disordered peptides (IDPs), applying scaling concepts is more challenging, but still at least partially successful [118-120]. Theoretical models at this level are mostly based on effective phenomeno- logical parameters [17] such as the Kuhn length, the famous Flory Huggins x-parameters characterizing polymer-solvent or monomer-monomer interactions,

the monomer mobility, the effective monomer charge and possibly the Debye screening length.

A number of generic coarse-grained simulation models have been proposed already decades ago to study polymer properties at this level: Lattice mod- els, where polymers are modeled as random self- avoiding walks on a lattice, and off-lattice mod- els, where polymers are modelled as chains of in- teracting hard-core spheres connected by springs. Among the most prominent models of this type is the Bond Fluctuation Model [121], a lattice model where monomers occupy cubes on a lattice and can be con- nected by a finite set of bonds, and the Kremer-Grest model [122], an off-lattice model that represents polymers as strings of hard-core spheres connected by nonlinear springs. Such models can be extended in various ways, e.g., to include bending potentials [123, 124], attractive non-bonded interactions [125], or (in the case polymer solutions) a hydrodynamic coupling to a fluid medium [126]. They have been used to verify scaling predictions [124, 127], to study generic aspects of single polymer phase transitions such as chain adsorption or the coil-globule tran- sition [128-130] properties of polymer melts and blends [131] and even dynamical transitions such as the glass transition [132-134]. To some extent, they can also be used to make quantitative predictions for specific polymers. For example, recent work by Everaers and coworkers [135] has shown that, for a wide range of commodity polymer melts, matching a single local property in melts of Kremer-Grest chains - the so-called dimensionless Kuhn number - is suffi- cient to reproduce the correct entanglement modulus [135, 136]. The Kuhn number is derived from micro- scopic quantities, i.e., the number of Kuhn segments in a volume of Kuhn length cube. The entanglement modulus is roughly proportional to a macroscopic quantity, the plateau shear modulus. Hence this ex- ample shows how simulations of a properly matched generic polymer model can be used to predict im- portant characteristics of polymer materials. Mil- ner has recently proposed a universal scaling theory of entanglements for melts and solutions of chains with arbitrary flexibility [137], suggesting that simi- lar approaches might also be successful for polymer solutions.

## C. Interacting polymers: The blob scale



The properties of polymer systems containing many polymers are often determined by conforma- tional restructuring on scales that are much larger than the monomeric scale. On such scales, polymers behave in many respect like single soft, interpene- trating "blobs", or chains of such blobs. In polymer

4

physics, the term blob often refers to a theoretical framework that allows for simple intuitive deriva- tions of crossover phenomena between different scal- ing regimes in polymer solutions [116, 117]. Here we will use it more generally to describe the soft char- acter of overlapping polymers.

In large-scale studies of interacting polymers, two novel classes of simulation models are becoming in- creasingly popular that account for this soft charac- ter: Ultra-coarse-grained particle-based models with soft potentials, and density-based models. In soft potential models, coarse-grained units are assumed to represent lumps of a sufficiently large number of microscopic particles that they can interpenetrate each other. The non-bonded potentials are still de- scribed in terms of pair interactions between parti- cles with positions ři and fj

Unb[k] =>Vij(ři,Ťj), i,j (1)

possibly augmented by higher-order multibody po- tentials [138]. However, the potentials do not diverge at ři = Tj. This is the case, for instance for "dissipa- tive particle dynamics" (DPD)-models [138, 139] or blob models [140-147].

In contrast, in density-based models [148-156], the non-bonded potentials are expressed as a func- tional of local number densities p = {pa} of coarse- grained monomer or solvent particles of type a, typ- ically in the form of an integral over a "free energy density"

## Unb[e] = [ d3r f(F, p).



(2)

The function f(~, [p]) is often taken to have a local quadratic form, defined in terms of Flory Huggins- like interaction parameters

f(r,p) kBT αβ =>XaBpa(F)PB(F)+(_pa(F)-po)2, (3) α where k gives the compressibility of the polymer so- lution or melt, and we have assumed for simplicity that the volume fraction per bead of all entities is the same We should mention that in practical simu- lations, the value of k is often reduced quite substan- tially compared to the real compressibility of poly- mers. This is done to to avoid numerical instabilities and enable simulations with larger time steps.

To complete the definition of the model, one must also specify how to determine the local densities pa and how to formulate the corresponding spatially discretized version of the equations of motion. Of- ten, the local densities are evaluated on a grid [148], but other off-lattice variants based on weighted den- sities have also been proposed [154, 157]. When us- ing a grid-based model in dynamical simulations, a

second practical issue is how to determine the re- sulting forces on monomers - whether to directly take the derivative of the discretized Hamiltonian with respect to the monomer positions [158, 159], or whether to calculate a discretized force field and interpolating that [152, 156, 160]. The former strat- egy guarantees that the simulation is based on a well-defined Hamiltonian, but it introduces lattice artefacts. The latter strategy gives more freedom to reduce the lattice artefacts and (approximately) re- store momentum conservation in molecular dynam- ics simulations, but it does not guarantee that one samples a rigorously defined statistical ensemble in the limit of zero time step. Thus the former ap- proach is better suited for studying the statistical mechanics of the system, and the latter for studying processes where hydrodynamics is important.

Eq. (3) defines one of the simplest density-based models, but numerous extensions are possible to make the model more flexible. One can add higher order terms [154, 155], additional density fields that characterize, e.g., local orientation or charges [161] and/or nonlocal terms. For example, electrostatic interactions can be included in (2) by including the energy density of the electrostatic field generated by the charge density distribution p(f').

Both soft-potential models and models with density-based potentials are particle-based and de- scribe the polymers as connected chains of explicit monomers, which differ only in the type of non- bonded interactions. Removing the hard excluded- volume interactions, however, has a fundamental consequence: It removes topological interactions, i.e., the chains can now cross each other. This signif- icantly changes the dynamic properties of the coarse- grained models and - in some cases - even the static structure.

Most prominently, the conformations of strictly two-dimensional polymers in dense melt are radi- cally different for overlapping and non-overlapping polymers [162-167]. The configurations of overlap- ping polymers are rather open and the number of interchain contacts per monomer is roughly con- stant. In contrast, non-overlapping polymers segre- gate from one another, and the number of contacts per monomer scales as N-3/8 with increasing chain length N. This is because most open configurations are forbidden due to excluded-volume interactions. This effect is independent of dynamics and also per- sists in Monte Carlo simulations that simply sample the phase space.

In higher dimensions, the fraction of actually for- bidden conformations in phase space is negligible, and the effect of hard excluded-volume interactions is more subtle. In systems of closed (ring) polymers, topological constraints partition the phase space,

5

since a large set of energetically allowed conforma- tions cannot be accessed kinetically from a given start configuration: Initally concatenated rings can- not be separated and initially separated rings can- not be concatenated. As a result, ring polymers in a melt of non-concatenated polymers are more com- pact than linear polymers, and their size (radius of gyration) scales differently as a function of N [168]. Capturing such effects with soft coarse-grained mod- els is a formidable challenge. Narros et al [146] have proposed a hierarchical multi-blob approach, where the direct interactions between soft blobs (coarse- grained monomers) are supplemented by additional interactions between the centers of mass that ac- count for the effect of topological interactions in a statistical sense. With this approach, they could reproduce the shrinking of ring polymers in melts with the correct exponent. However, other char- acteristics of large ring polymers in ring polymer melt, e.g., the dominance of double-folded confor- mations with primitive tree structure ("lattice ani- mals") [169, 170], are not captured. Interestingly, a recent comparison of density functional calculations (which ignore topological constraints) and and CG simulations of Kremer-Grest chains has suggested that topological effects have no effect on the density profiles in sufficiently dense melts [171], although they do seem to affect the thickness of depletion re- gions close to surfaces in semidilute solutions.

In contrast to ring polymer melts, melts of linear polymers are ergodic in phase space and blob mod- els can mostly account for their static structure, at least on large scales. On small scales, there are devi- ations. For example, they tend to overestimate the frequency of small knots [172, 173], in particular if the size of the excluded volume of monomers is com- parable to that of the Kuhn segment [172]. More im- portantly, models with soft interactions fail to repro- duce their dynamics at large N which is character- ized by entanglements between polymers as already discussed earlier [9, 17, 174]: According to the clas- sic reptation picture, polymers undergo an effective one-dimensional diffusion in a tube, which is created by their entanglements with other polymers.

Polymers interacting with soft potentials, how- ever, do not reptate, [176]. Schieber [177] and later Likhtman [178] have proposed an ingenious way to restore entanglements at the level of single- chain dynamics [9, 179, 180]: They proposed to mimic the effect of entanglements by virtual "slip links", discrete objects through which the chains must slip. This model has later been extended to multi-chain models where the slip links are fluctu- ating objects that connect different chains to each other [181-184]. Such slip link degrees of freedom introduce effective attractive interactions between

(a) Atomistic: ...- CH2-CH=CH-CH2 -...

## (b) Moderate CG: ... (CH2-CH=CH-CH2



...

## (c) Slip-spring: ... (CH2-CH=CH-CH2)12) ...



FIG. 1. Different levels of description of cis-1,4- polybutadiene (cPB) in Ref. [175]. (a) United atom model; (b) Structurally coarse-grained model with hard core interactions. (c) Soft potential model with slip- links. The dynamical single- chain and viscoelastic prop- erties can be mapped onto each other and are also in good agreement with experimental data. Reprinted from Ref. [175] with permission of XXX

polymers. However, they can be calculated analyti- cally and subtracted from the basic potential func- tion, e.g., Eqs. (1) or (2), to eliminate their effect on the static behavior [181, 182]. Wu et al and Be- hbahani et al have recently demonstrated the po- tential of multi-chain slip-link approaches in ultra- coarse-grained simulations of real commodity poly- mers such as polyethylene [185], polystyrene [186], and polybutadiene [175] (see Fig. 1).

## D. Mesoscopic scale: Transition to field theories



The next level is the scale of mesoscale organi- zation, i.e., structure formation in inhomogeneous polymer systems. Emerging phenomena at this scale are the nucleation of crystallites in semicrystalline

6

polymers [18], phase separation and demixing [45], wetting phenomena, or self-assembly [50].

Apart from the coarse-grained polymer models with hard or soft interactions discussed in IIB and II C, a new tool for investigating polymer systems on such scales are field-theoretic approaches [188-190]. The most common starting points for the derivation of such approaches are density-based model such as (2). By field theoretic manipulations such as delta functional transformations [191, 192] or Hubbard- Stratonovich transformations [188], one can rewrite the partition function of this system as an integral over fluctuating real and imaginary fields. For exam- ple, the delta functional transformation of the model (2) yields the following expression for the partition function [191]:

## Z x DW Dp exp(-F|kBT)



(4)

with

F[p, W] = [ d3r f(F,p)/kBT (5)

kBT

-E J d3paW. - En;ln(2;/n;), j

(in the canonical ensemble) where W = {Wa} de- notes a vector of fluctuating imaginary auxiliary fields Wa(f), j sums over different polymer types, and 2; [W] is the single-chain partition functions of polymers of type j without non-bonded interactions in the fluctuating external field W.

Taking these expressions as a starting point, one can make several approximations: First, one can re- place the integral (4) by a saddle point approxima- tion, which amounts to approximating the free en- ergy of the system by the extremum of F in Eq. (5). Remarkably, the extremum for W is not on the original imaginary integration domain, but purely real. The approximation results in the so-called self- consistent field (SCF) theory [191-193], one of the most powerful mean-field approximation for inho- mogeneous polymer systems, which can often pre- dict real interfacial structures in polymers at an al- most quantitative level [192]. Figuratively speaking, the SCF theory describes polymer systems as assem- blies of independent chains, each in the ensemble- averaged field of the surrounding chains. The aver- aging approximation is good if chains interact with many other chains, which is true for chains of high molecular weight since they overlap with each other. In three dimensional melts of linear polymers, the degree of interchain interactions can be character- ized by the so-called invariant polymerization index Ñ = a6 påN, where a is the average segment length, and N the numbers of segments in a polymer chain.

a)

b)

7

c)

C

1.6}

1.7

Tau density

91ª1 1.2

One-phase dilute

le-07

le-06

Two-phase coexistence

One-phase dense

00

G-O Tau SC O O Tau-RNA CC

0.8-

le-08

0.0001

Pb3

FIG. 2. Coarse-grained simulations of liquid-liquid phase separated droplets of Tau proteins [187]. a) Particle- based CG model using a Kremer-Grest type representation of chains. b) FTS model, studied by Complex Langevin simulations. c) Phase diagram obtained from FTS simulations as a function of Bjerrum length lB and Tau-density p rescaled with the statistical segment length b (blue curve). The red curve shows the corresponding phase diagram for mixtures of Tau and RNA. Adapted from Ref. [187] with permission of XXX

For N > , the SCF approximation becomes ex- act. Experimentally relevant values of N are of order 102 - 104.

A second approximation to (4) consists in apply- ing a partial saddle point approximation only with respect to the auxiliary fields WQ. Thus the func- tional F[p, W] is extremized with respect to W, giv- ing self-consistent equations for W[p], which have again, a real solution for W. This procedure turns F into a real-valued density functional F[p]. It serves as starting point for dynamic mean field theories of polymers which have the structure of continuum the- ories, but retain some knowledge of the macromolec- ular architecture of polymers. The simplest Ansatz of this kind is the purely diffusive equation of motion [194-205]

## Otp(t) =Vr |drA(r,r')Vru(r',t)



(6)

with pa(f,t) = 8F|8pa(f, t). Here the mobility ma- trix function (r, r') = {AaB(r,r') describes the mo- tion of monomers at position f in response to a a lo- cal thermodynamic force (-Vr'u(f',t) and may be nonlocal to account for the effect of chain connec- tivity. Possible extensions include the coupling to equations of fluid dynamics in order to account for hydrodynamics [206-209], or the introduction of a time-delayed response functions to account for mem- ory [210, 211].

Going beyond the mean-field approximation, field- theoretic simulations (FTS), aim at sampling the full partition function (4). The field of FTS is relatively new and, so far, restricted to static simulations. An important problem that needs to be overcome is the

imaginary integration domain of W in the integral (4). Since the Wa are imaginary, the "action" F in (5) is a complex, rapidly oscillating quantity, which leads to a sign problem. Pioneered by Ganesan and Fredrickson [212], one approach to overcoming this problem is to use the so-called "Complex Langevin" simulation method, which involves solving Langevin equations in the entire complex plane, in the case of Eq. (4) for both the W and p degrees of freedom.

If the underlying non-bonded potential functional is a quadratic functional of the densities in p as, e.g., in Eq. (5), one can reduce the number of fluctuating fields by a factor of two by applying a Hubbard Stratonovich transformation instead of a delta functional transformation, which significantly reduces the computational costs. Complex Langevin simulations based on this approach have been used by Fredrickson and coworkers and other groups to study, among other, fluctuation effects in di- block copolymer phase diagrams [189, 212], polymer nanocomposites [213], polyelectrolyte complexation [189], and liquid-liquid phase separation of intrinsi- cally disordered proteins [187, 214]. Fig. 2 shows a FTS simulation droplets formed from Tau-Proteins, strong polyampholytes which undergo liquid-liquid phase separation due to self-coacervation.

In dense melts of polymers containing only two types of monomers A and B, a second approach be- comes possible [190, 201, 202, 217-219], which has been applied with considerable success by Matsen and coworkers to study block copolymer systems [190]: In that case, two fluctuating fields result from the Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation, an imag- inary one which can be associated with density fluc-

2.6

A+B+L 1

L

A+B

2.4

UNX

A+B+BuE

2.2

disordered

2.02

0.00 0.04

0.08

0.12 0.16

¢c

FIG. 3. Fluctuation effects on the Lifshitz point in the phase diagram of ternary A/B/AB homopoly- mer/diblock melts, as revealed by field-theoretic simu- lations in Ref. [215, 216]. Dashed line shows mean-field result, symbols connected by by solid lines the simula- tion results. Reprinted from Ref. [217] with permission of XXX

tuations, and a real one which describes the compo- sition fluctuations. In nearly incompressible melts, the density fluctuations have little influence on the composition fluctuations, which determine the phase behavior. Therefore, one may apply a partial sad- dle point approximation regarding the density fluc- tuations only, and obtains a purely real fluctuating field theory, which can be treated, e.g., by standard Monte Carlo methods. Comparisons with Complex Langevin simulations [218, 220] have shown that the partial saddle point approximation is indeed accu- rate in dense melts. The advantage of the approach is that it allows more easily to access highly incom- pressible melts at experimentally relevant polymer- ization indices [190].

In many cases, fluctuation corrections mainly shift phase transition temperatures or change the order of a transition from second order to weakly first order, but there are situations where they may fundamen- tally change the properties of a system. One promi- nent example is the "microemulsion channel" in bal- anced mixtures of A,B homopolymers and A:B di- block copolymers. Upon increasing xN, SCF calcu- lations predict a demixing transition at low copoly- mer content, and an ordering transition to a periodic lamellar phase at high copolymer content. Accord- ing to the SCF theory, both transitions meet at a so-called "Lifshitz critical point", where the lamel- lar thickness of the periodic phase diverges. In real- ity, generic theoretical considerations [221] suggest that the Lifshitz critical point has a lower critical dimension of four, meaning that fluctuations will in- variably destroy it in three (or fewer) dimensions. The fate of the Lifshitz point in lower dimensions has long remained unclear, but was recently revealed

8

by field-theoretic simulations of Vorselaers, Spencer and Matsen [215, 216]: It splits up into a critical end point and a tricritical point (see Fig. 3). This exam- ple also demonstrates how simulations of polymer systems can give insights onto fundamental ques- tions in statistical mechanics.

## E. Macroscopic scale: The engineering scale



Finally, at the macroscopic level, the focus lies on properties of polymeric materials that are of di- rect interest for engineers: Mechanical stability, mi- crostructure, stress distribution, viscoelasticity, con- stitutive relations, ageing phenomena. Emerging phenomena that are studied on such scales are, for instance, polymeric flow patterns in complex geome- tries [223], but also inherently inhomogeneous pro- cesses such as viscoelastic phase separation [224], foaming [225, 226], or crack formation [227]. On macroscopic scales, materials are described by a set of characteristic continuous fields and corresponding transport equations. They are typically constructed somewhat heuristically based on general symmetry considerations and conservation laws, following the spirit of the famous Hohenberg-Halperin classifica- tion of dynamic critical phenomena [228]. For ex- ample, so-called "model A" dynamics is used to de- scribe relaxation processes where conservation laws are not important, "model B" dynamics is used to describe diffusive processes where only the local con- servation of one "order parameter" (e.g., the poly- mer volume fraction) matters (an example is Eq. (6)), "model C" dynamics describes processes where other conserved mass densities also become impor- tant, and "model H" additionally accounts for local momentum conservation and convection in order to describe stress, flow and hydrodynamic phenomena.

In polymeric materials, these descriptions are of- ten combined with simplified microscopic models for viscoelasticity, which account both for flow and in- ternal relaxation processes. An important tools in the construction of such models is the so-called con- vected derivative, a concept originally introduced by Oldroyd [229]: It describes convection with respect to a "material frame" of comoving material particles and thus in some sense generalizes the total deriva- tives in fluid dynamics to tensorial quantities: Con- sider a fluid flow characterized by a deformation rate field Gij = djui and carrying a scalar field (f, t) and a tensor field Qij(T, t). Let Q(L) (f,t) and Qu (f,t) be the corresponding scalar and tensorial densities in the comoving frame with @(₸, 0) = @(L) ij (₸,0), Qij(F,0) = Q11 (₸,0). The total derivative is defined such that it describes the evolution of the scalar field

9

20

¢ at Time =20

¢ at Time =80

0.40

0.40

15

10

5

0

20

10

20

15

10

0

20 0.39

10

0.4

0.39

0.39 5

0.39

20

10

0 0

¢ at Time =130

0.41

0.4

0.5

0.39

0.45

0.38

0.4

0.37

0.36

0.35

0.34

20

0.33

20

15

10

5

0

20

10

0.35

0.3

0.25

20

10

0 0

¢ at Time =200

10

0 0

0.2

¢ at Time =320

0.8

0.7

20

0.6

15

## ¢ at Time =500



0.8

0.8

20

0.7

20

0.7

15

0.6

10

0.5

15

0.6

10

0.5

5

0.4

10

0.5

5

0.4

0

20

10

0.3

0

20

10

20

0.2

10

0 0

5

0.4

0.3

0

20

10

0.3

20

0.2

20

0.2

10

0 0

10

0 0

FIG. 4. Spinodal phase separation in a continuous viscoelastic model. The numerical simulation is based on a Lagrange-Galerkin finite element method. Adapted from Reference [222] with permission of XXX.

(ī,t) = §(L) (f - ut, t) in the comoving frame, i.e.,

dt ao := a+ B(L) = at@ + uVb, (7)

When generalizing this concept to the tensorial field Q, one must take into account the possible defor- mations of the coordinates of Q in the comoving frame, which can be described by a transformation matrix defined by the deformation rate G. For contravariant tensors Q, the relation between Q and Q(L) in the limit t => 0 is given by Q(f,t) = (1+GTt)Q(L)(f-ut,t)(1+Gt). This motivates the definition of the upper convected derivative

Q := at Q(L) = atQ+TVQ - GTQ - QG (8)

The corresponding consideration for covariant ten- sors yields the lower convected derivative

## Q := atQ + TVQ + GTQ + QG



(9)

The concept of convective derivatives provides a framework for deriving constitutive relations in vis- coelastic materials in a geometrically consistent manner. For example, the so-called upper convected Maxwell modell

0 + X0 = 2nD (10)

with D = 1 (G +GT) describes a material with a lin- ear steady-state stress-strain relation O steady = 2nD

where the stress tensor, o, relaxes in a simple expo- nential manner towards its steady-state value with relaxation time A.

More sophisticated viscoelastic models are typi- cally based on one of two approaches [10]: Either use phenomenological considerations to construct more complicated expressions for the relaxation of the stress tensor and/or its steady-state value, or se- lect a simplified molecular model of the polymers and use kinetic theory to derive approximate ex- pressions for the stress tensor. One popular start- ing point of the second kind is to consider a New- tonian fluid filled with noninteracting elastic dumb- bells, i.e., two beads by "Finitely Extensible Nonlin- ear Elastic" (FENE) springs. with a spring constant k(R) that diverges if the distance R of the beads ex- ceeds a limiting value. A Fokker-Planck equation for the conformation of the dumbbells is then coupled to the Navier-Stokes equations via two convective con- tributions to the Fokker-Planck equation (one for the center of mass and one for the relative distance of beads) and an extra stress term in the Navier Stokes equations. Many macroscopic models for polymer fluids can be seen as being approximations to this FENE model. The most prominent one is the Oldroyd-B model, one of the first models for poly- mer fluids [229], which replaces the FENE spring by a regular linear Hookean spring [230]. This simplifies the mathematical analysis, however, it leads to un- physical singularities under certain flow conditions where the dumbbells stretch to infinity. Another ap-

proximation is the Peterlin model (FENE-P), where the nonlinear spring constant k(R) is replaced by an averaged value k((R)) [231, 232].

In order to avoid mistakes when constructing such models, considerable care has to be taken to ensure that they are thermodynamical consistent [233, 234]. Several mathematical frameworks have been devel- oped which help to enforce consistency, the most rig- orous being the GENERIC framework that makes a strict distinction between anti-symmetric reversible and symmetric irreversible (dissipative) contribu- tions to the dynamical equations [235]. It should be noted that not all published macroscopic mod- els are thermodynamically consistent. Schieber and Cordoba have recently developed a simplified set of requirements that allows one to perform basic consistency tests without having to apply the full GENERIC machinery [234]. Another, even more difficult question, is to prove that the models ac- tually have solutions for arbitrary initial condi- tions. Global existence results for weak solutions of the Peterlin model have recently been obtained by Masmoudi [230] and, regarding a class of gener- alized Peterlin models, by Lukacova-Medvidova et al [236, 237].

The study of inhomogeneous polymer solutions is particular challenging due to the vastly different mo- bilities of polymer and solvent molecules. Quite gen- erally, large dynamical asymmetries between com- ponents of a demixing system often result in uncon- ventional network-like pattern formation and novel dynamic scaling exponents [238] compared to stan- dard model B or model H demixing, because the domains of the slow phase tend to behave like vis- coelastic objects. This phenomenon was first dis- covered by Tanaka in 1993 [239] who termed it " vis- coelastic phase separation", and is still subject of active research [224, 240-245]. Theoretical models typically build on the two-fluid model proposed by Doi and Onuki [246] and Milner [247], which include a coupling between elastic stress and concentration. Based on this idea, Zhou et al proposed a number of phenomenological models for viscoelastic phase separation, paying particular attention to thermo- dynamic consistency [243]. Spiller et al [244] have recently taken the kinetic approach and derived a two-fluid model for solutions of Hookian dumbbells which is consistent with the GENERIC formalism. Brunk et al have analyzed a number of models for viscoelastic phase separation from a mathematical point of view and proved the existence of weak so- lutions [222, 245, 248]. An example of a numerical simulation of one of their models is shown in Fig. 4.

10

## III. SCALE-BRIDGING STRATEGIES



In the previous section, we have discussed the hi- erarchy of models that have been designed and used to study polymeric systems on different scales. In many cases, however, using a single model is not sufficient to fully characterize a material of inter- est. Thus multiscale modeling techniques must be applied, which combine different scales in one sim- ulation, or at least establish quantitative connec- tions between different scales. The key to multiscale modeling is coarse-graining, i.e., the art of design- ing high-level models with few degrees of freedom (" coarse-grained (CG) models") that capture the es- sential features of an underlying "fine-grained (FG)" system.

Classical coarse-graining strategies traditionally follow one of two philosophies [5]: "Top-down" CG models are designed based on physical intuition without direct input from FG simulations. Ex- amples are generic top-down models such as the Bond Fluctuation Model [121] and the Kremer-Grest model [122] discussed in Sec. IIB, which are used to study generic properties of polymer systems, but also chemically specific top-down models such as the MARTINI model [114], which use experimental in- formation such as solubility parameters to match in- teraction parameters. In contrast, "bottom-up" CG models are constructed from FG simulations in a systematic manner such that they capture certain structural or thermodynamic properties of interest. This is a popular strategy to derive classical atom- istic force fields from electronic structure calcula- tions, and it is also used to construct higher-level models. In addition to bottom-up and top-down ap- proaches, hybrid approaches are becoming increas- ingly popular that integrate information from dif- ferent sources - FG simulations as well as experi- ments [249-252], and data-driven methods that ap- ply machine-learning methods [14, 100, 252].

Numerous coarse-graining and scale-bridging strategies have been proposed over the past decades (see Refs. [4-8, 10, 11, 13-15] for review articles), and giving a comprehensive overview is beyond the scope of the present perspective article. Instead we will give a very personal view on different aspects of the coarse-graining problem with a focus on bottom- up coarse-graining, on lessons learned from the past and challenges for the future.

Formally, defining the coarse-graining task seems quite obvious: Given a microscopic dynamical sys- tem with N degrees of freedom and correspond- ing equations of motion, define a reduced set of n representative collective variables and derive their dynamical equations from those of the microscopic system. This idea is old and projection operator

techniques to derive coarse-grained equations have been proposed already in the 60s by Zwanzig and Mori [253-255]. They were used, among other, to derive equations of fluctuating hydrodynamics for simple and complex fluids [256, 257]. In recent years, the Mori-Zwanzig formalism has attracted in- creasing interest in the coarse-graining community, mostly thanks to the work of Español and coworkers who promoted it as a practical tool to construct, e.g., dynamic density functional theories [258] or particle- based DPD models [259]. In principle, projection operators allow one to derive exact dynamical equa- tions for the chosen coarse-grained variables. How- ever, these are complex integro-differential equations that cannot be reduced to practically useful model equations, e.g. stochastic equations, without sub- stantial further approximations. Even more seri- ously, Glatzel and Schilling have recently argued that the dynamic equations for the coarse-grained variables Ai(t) cannot necessarily be related to a potential of mean force [16, 260] U[A¿]. Their claim is consistent with a discussion by Zwanzig in Ref. [261], who pointed out that the memory kernel in the linear Mori-Zwanzig equations absorbs some of the nonlinearities of a nonlinear conservative poten- tial in the FG equations. Unfortunately, it implies that the resulting coarse-grained models are not nec- essarily compatible with the GENERIC framework [235] and its clear distinction between external driv- ing forces, conservative interactions, and dissipative forces. As discussed earlier, the GENERIC structure helps to enforce thermodynamic consistency and en- sure, by construction, that violations of the second law of thermodynamics are not possible in a coarse- grained model. Giving up this structure thus rep- resents a serious drawback. Luckily, recent work by Vroyland and Monmarché suggests a possible way out of this dilemma. Using the Mori-Zwanzig for- malism and considering a single CG particle, they showed that it is possible to derive a GLE that com- plies with the GENERIC structure, if one allows for position dependent memory kernels[262].

One may be tempted to set aside these problems and design CG models that primarily target static equilibrium properties. One can then use the parti- tion function of the microscopic system as the start- ing point and integrate out the N microscopic de- grees of freedom while constraining the n CG vari- ables, which directly gives the potential of mean force or "free energy landscape" U[Ai]. In general, however, simple analytic expressions for U[Ai] are not available, such that a simulation of the exact CG model is as expensive, from a computational point of few, than the simulation of the FG model. Thus further approximations must again be made such as, e.g., rewriting U[Ai] as a sum of effective pair or low

11

order multibody potentials.

Finally, already the identification of meaningful coarse-grained variables represents a challenge in it- self - in particular if the coarse-grained model is ex- pected to capture several very different aspects of the underlying FG model. This leads to the well-known problem of representability: A CG model that re- produces the structure of the FG model does not necessarily have the correct thermal properties and vice versa. Moreover, a CG model that was con- structed for one state point (e.g., one density), not necessarily captures the properties of the FG model at another state point (another density). This so- called transferability issue will obviously cause prob- lems when using CG models for studying strongly inhomogeneous systems.

In sum, coarse-graining is bound to be a somewhat " dirty" business. The reason is that, unfortunately, it is not possible to simplify a complex problem just by rewriting it in terms of fewer variables. Coarse- graining is effectively an optimisation problem which requires many compromises and a high level of phys- ical and chemical intuition. The coarse-graining phi- losophy rests on the assumption that the large-scale structure of materials can be understood without ex- plicit knowledge of microscopic details. In the case of polymers, one hopes that this assumption is justi- fied due to their repetitive molecular structure, the high level of conformational disorder, and the dom- inant role of entropy.

We will now discuss selected aspects of coarse- graining in polymeric systems, or more generally, soft matter systems.

A.

## Static coarse-graining



1. Structure-based coarse-graining

Structure-based coarse-graining techniques are typically used to design particle-based CG models with the goal to reproduce structural properties of the FG system such as spatial correlation functions. The CG variables are the positions Ri of CG par- ticles, and the optimization task consists in finding the best approximation for the free energy landscape U[Ri] or the configuration dependent force field Fj [Ri] in the phase space of the CG variables. Re- garding equilibrium static coarse-graining, the field is already quite advanced. The CG bonded interac- tions can be calculated in a straightforward manner by sampling, e.g., bond length and bond angle distri- butions in small reference simulations. To determine non-bonded CG interactions, researchers can use the open-source package VOTCA [263] (www.votca.org) and select between a range of established methods

12

[5, 7] such as inverse Monte Carlo (IMC) [264], it- erative Boltzmann inversion (IBI) [265-269], force matching (FM) [270-274], or relative entropy (RE) minimization between the CG and the FG distri- bution [275]. Alternatively, they can employ the framework of the generalized Yvon-Born-Green (g- YBG) [276-278], or use artificial neural networks [100, 279, 280]. Noid et al have pointed out that the quality of non-bonded CG force fields can be greatly improved if one distinguishes between CG monomers that have different local connectivities within a molecule [281, 282], e.g., between middle and end segments.

a) 3,5

3

2,5

2

1.5

U (KJ/mol) / g (r)

One paradigmatic problem in structural coarse- graining is to construct pair potentials from radial distribution functions (RDFs) of particles as deter- mined, e.g., from FG simulations. This is known as the inverse Henderson problem. As proved in 1974 by Henderson for finite systems with fixed particle number [284] and very recently by Frommer et al [285, 286] for the thermodynamic limit, the problem has a unique solution for a rich class of interaction potentials which includes, among other the so-called Lennard-Jones type potentials [287]. Nevertheless, the problem is ill-posed in the sense that a small noise in the RDF can lead to large changes in the po- tentials. In other words, quite dissimilar potentials can produce almost identical RDFs [283, 288] (see also Fig. 5). This opens possibilities to optimize pair potentials not only with respect to structural prop- erties, but also to other properties as well. Building on this idea, Hanke and coworkers have recently de- veloped novel integral equation-based methods that allow to solve the inverse Henderson problem with additional constraints [289, 290], such that the re- sulting CG model reproduces both the structural correlations and the thermodynamic properties of the microscopic system [290].

1

0.5

0

-0,5

-0.2 0,4

0,6

r (nm)

b)

3

2,5

- U .LJI-LJI - U, LJI-LJI - U50 LJI-LJI

- U2 LJI-LJ1

300 -- target RDF LJI-LJI -- 50 steps RDF LJ1-LJI - - 300 steps RDF LJ1-LJ1

0,8

1

- U ,LJI-LJI

ref - UP.IBI LJI-LJI - UIMCLJI-LJI - - target RDF LJ1-LJ1 -- P-IBI RDF LJI-LJI -- IMC RDF LJI-LJ1

2

1.5

U (KJ/mol) / g(r)

An interesting alternative way of dealing with the representability problem has been proposed by Lebold and Noid [291, 292]. Rather than trying to find one CG model that captures both the energetics and the structure of the FG model, they suggest to explicitly keep track of energetic and entropic con- tributions to the potential of mean force [291, 292] in the CG simulation. Thus the effective potential is split up as

## U[Ri] = Uw [Ri] - T Sw [Ri], (11)



where Uw is constructed such that it gives, on av- erage, the energy of the fine-grained system with collective variables constrained to Ri. The poten- tial U is obtained by standard structural coarse- graining methods, the potential Uw ist determined using a minimization method similar to least-square fitting. When analyzing CG simulation trajectories,

1

0,5

0

-0.5

-1

0,4

0,6

0,8

r (nm)

FIG. 5. Uncertainties in the reconstruction of pair po- tentials from pair correlation function. In this example, the target RDF is taken from simulations of a binary Lennard-Jones mixture, hence the true potential (black solid line) is well-known. Solid lines show potentials as indicated, dashed lines with the same color the RDFs obtained with the same potential. a) IBI results after 50 and 300 iterations (green and blue) (Red line shows the logarithm of the RDF for comparison.) b) Final re- sults obtained with an IBI variant (red) and with IMC (green). The true potential is best reconstructed with the IMC method. All potentials, however, yield RDFs that are almost indistinguishable from the target RDF. Reprinted from Ref. [283] with permission of XXX.

the potential Uw can then be used to calculate ob- servables that depend on energy. As a side effect, this approach also allows one to estimate the ex- pected change in the potential of mean force at a dif- ferent temperature with remarkable accuracy [292]. Among other, this could be used to overcome sam- pling problems in the microscopic reference system, e.g., close to a glass transition [293].

Going beyond pure pair potentials, higher-order multibody potentials [294-298] or density-dependent potentials [299-308] offer additional flexibility which can be exploited to develop CG models with im-

proved transferability properties [309]. In partic- ular, density-dependent potentials provide a com- paratively straightforward way of accounting for the local environment of interacting CG particles that may undergo liquid-vapor phase separation [310], and they are quite popular in empirical models with soft potentials such as (many-body) DPD [138] or models with density-based interactions [157]. Such empirical soft potential models are often set up as a sum of two contributions: Local density-dependent repulsive interactions between particles that account for the effect of excluded volume interactions, and density-independent attractive interactions that ac- count for cohesion. The functional form of the two terms is usually postulated, but they can also be de- rived in a bottom-up fashion from FG simulations, e.g., by a combination of force matching and relative entropy minimization [306, 308]. Since one has some freedom how to distribute the forces between differ- ent contributions, the results are not unique [306], they depend on the coarse-graining procedure. This gives freedom which can be exploited to further op- timize the potentials with respect to representability and transferability.

We should note that density-dependent poten- tials also have interesting applications beyond liquid- vapor systems, e.g., in ultra-coarse-grained descrip- tions of compressible fluids or in coarse-grained de- scriptions of responsive materials where the shape of CG particles depends on their local environment [311].

In other situations where local orientations of molecules or monomers are important, it might be desirable to include multibody potentials [312] that also depend on the local conformation, such as three- body Stillinger-Weber type potentials that depend on the local angles between the interaction sites [294, 313, 314]. Scherer, Andrienko, and cowork- ers have developed systematic ways to derive such potential, either by force matching [297] or using kernel-based machine learning with covariant mesh- ing in order to account for inherent symmetries [315]. So far, this has only been applied for small molecules, but it also offers interesting perspectives for simulations of, e.g., semicrystalline polymers.

An alternative way of parameterizing strongly configuration dependent effective interaction poten- tials has recently been developed by Bereau and Rudzinsky [316, 317]. Their idea is to use different CG force fields for different regions in (local) con- figurational space, and interpolate ('hop') between them depending on the current state of the system. This multisurface concept, borrowed from models for electronic transitions, allows for a much better local optimization of force fields without having to resort to complicated force field parametrizations. As a

13

nice side effect, potential barriers can also be rep- resented much more accurately, which greatly im- proves the dynamic properties of the system. A related "multiconfigurational" concept designed to capture conformational chain transitions and their effect on potentials of mean force has been proposed by Sharp et al [318].

## 2. Thermodynamics-based coarse-graining



The coarse-graining approaches discussed in the previous section yield CG models that capture struc- tural properties of the FG reference system such as pair correlation functions or statistical averages of mechanical force fields. From a multiscale point of view, it might often be more interesting to capture thermodynamic properties such as the equation of state (the density), the compressibility or more gen- erally, high-wavelength structure factors, solubility parameters, interfacial tensions and surface tensions. Thermodynamics-based CG strategies are popular in top-down coarse-graining, as they use thermo- dynamic quantities as input which are more easily accessible in experiments. Typically, a certain func- tional form of potentials is assumed, and the pa- rameters are matched such that the CG model re- produces the desired thermodynamic properties.

Thermodynamics-based coarse-graining is also the most natural approach when designing field-based continuum model s or extremely CG models with soft potentials such as DPD or density-based po- tentials. As we have discussed above, density-based models and field-based continuum models are closely related to each other. There also exists a direct connection between DPD and continuum mechan- ics: For simple fluids, Español and Revenga have in- troduced a variant of DPD [319], termed "smoothed dissipative particle dynamics" (sDPD), which is en- tirely constructed from thermodynamic properties and can be seen as a Lagrangian solver for the fluc- tuating Navier-Stokes equations.

When constricting ultra CG models, one must again distinguish between bonded and non-bonded potentials. Bonded potentials can be determined in a structure-based manner as described in Sec. III A 1. On large scales, when studying polymers of large molecular weight, it is often sufficient to use simple chain models such as the discrete or con- tinuous Gaussian chain model [17], which requires matching only one parameter (the Kuhn length) [320] to the average conformational properties of the chains in the reference system. Determining non- bonded interactions is more difficult, as standard density-based potentials or interaction terms in field- based models (Eqs. (2) and (5)) are typically framed

in a thermodynamic language in terms of compress- ibilities, Flory Huggins x parameters (Eq. (3)) etc.

Specifically, mapping x parameters still repre- sents an outstanding challenge. Field-theoretic mod- els typically assume that it describes the effec- tive non-bonded interactions between CG polymer segments and is independent of local composition, chain length and chain architecture. This picture is clearly greatly simplified and it has long been unclear whether the concept of a purely monomer- based x parameters is at all reasonable. Luckily, re- cent work by Morse, Matsen and coworkers [190] on diblock copolymer melts suggests that this is proba- bly the case, at least for dense polymer melts, due to a universality in the phase behavior of polymers with large molecular weight. They proposed to determine the x parameter in diblock copolymer melts by fit- ting the collective structure factor in the disordered state of symmetric diblock copolymer (BCP) melts to accurate theoretical predictions of a renormalized theory that accounts for the effect of fluctuations and finite chain lengths [321]. Using this top-down mapping method, they were able to quantitatively reproduce the location of the order-disorder transi- tion (ODT) in BCP melts of a number of particle- based models [321, 322] and also experimental sys- tems [323] after accounting for the effect of polydis- persity. Building on this insight, Willis et al [324] proposed as alternative approach to directly use the ODT for mapping x after correcting for effects of polydispersity and compositional asymmetry. Rean- alyzing published experimental data, they mapped x(T) onto the functional form

X(T) = = +B, (12)

where A subsumes energetic and B entropic con- tributions to the effective segment interactions, and extracted values of A and B for 19 different chemical pairs.

The x-calibration scheme of Morse and coworkers relies on the existence of accurate theoretical pre- dictions for the structure and phase behavior of di- block copolymer melts. When looking at more com- plex systems, such predictions are usually not avail- able, and less accurate mapping procedures must be adopted. A number of heuristic schemes for match- ing Flory Huggins type interaction parameters have been proposed by De Nicola et al [325, 326], that either rely on matching energies with CG off-lattice models [325] or adjusting conformational properties of homopolymers in solution [326]. Ledum et al have developed a machine-learning protocol for optimiz- ing such parameters with respect to arbitrary target quantities, e.g., density profiles [327].

14

Sherck et al [328] and Weyman et al [329] have recently developed systematic bottom-up coarse- graining strategies for deriving field-based models with non-bonded monomer interactions that are not restricted to the Flory Huggins form (3). Their idea is to proceed in two steps. In the first step, a CG particle-based with soft pair potentials of given func- tional form is determined from reference simulations of a microscopic model, e.g., by relative entropy min- imization [328] or by matching the RDF. The sec- ond step is a Hubbard stratonovich transformation that turns the particle model into an auxiliary field model, which can then be studied by field-theoretical simulations. The second step involves an inversion of the pair potential which is not possible for hard core potentials, therefore the first step is essential and cannot be omitted. This still remains true if one replaces the Hubbard-Stratonovich transforma- tion by a delta functional transformation in order to obtain a field theory of the type (4, 5). The under- lying density-based potential does not have to be an integral over a local free energy density f(, p), it could also describe nonlocal interactions as, e.g., in

## Unb[p] = > > d3rd3r' pa(F) PB(F') VaB(F - F'), af



however, VaB(f) then still needs to be integrable. We should note that, strictly speaking, the bottom- up approaches of Sherck et al and Weyman et al use ideas taken from structural coarse-graining. Never- theless, the resulting CG models do not capture local structural properties such as packing effects, hence they are closer to thermodynamically CG models than to structurally CG models.

Compared to structural coarse-graining, one dis- advantage of thermodynamics-based coarse-graining is that one loses the direct connection between me- chanical forces in the CG and the FG system. Since forces drive the dynamics, it becomes more difficult to restore the correct dynamical properties without further adjustments. Indeed, recent studies on ionic liquids [330] have suggested that structure-based CG models tend to have a more consistent dynamical behavior than thermodynamically CG models, e.g., regarding the relative mobility of anions and cations. We will specifically discuss issues of dynamic coarse- graining in the next section. Thermodynamics- based coarse-graining also becomes questionable in systems far from equilibrium, e.g., in active flu- ids. One should note, however, that most structure- based coarse-graining techniques are also no longer applicable for such systems, as most of them - with the exception of force matching - assume local ther- modynamic equilibrium.

B. Dynamic coarse-graining

The most common approach to studying dynam- ical properties in CG simulations is to use the free energy landscape obtained from a static equilibrium coarse-graining procedure as an effective interaction potential in molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. This approach can be quite successful if one accounts for a few side effects of structural coarse-graining: First, as known from the Mori-Zwanzig formalism [261] integrating out degrees of freedom invariably introduces friction and stochastic noise in the CG dynamical equations. In a standard MD simulation, these friction terms are disregarded, which acceler- ates the dynamics. Second, CG free energy land- scapes are typically smoother than atomistic ones, which further reduces the direct friction between CG particles. As a result, coarse-graining reduces the separation between originally highly disparate time scales such as, e.g., the inertial and the diffusive time scales (the telescope effect [331], and acceler- ates slower dynamical processes.

From a point of view of time bridging, both the speedup and the telescoping are beneficial, as they allow one to access later time scales in CG simu- lations [332] and study processes on different time scales simultaneously in one simulation. One of the earliest [94] and still widely and successfully used approaches to dynamic coarse-graining has been to simply take advantage of this effect, determine the speedup factor of the process of interest, and use this to map the CG dynamics on real dynamics [333-336], taking into account that the speedup fac- tor might be different for different processes and/or components [336].

However, care must be taken that the speedup does not change the order of "faster" and "slower" processes and which might change dynamical path- ways, particularly in dynamically asymmetric sys- tems. This defines the problem of dynamic con- sistency [11]. As already discussed in the previous section, one key to reducing this problem is accu- rate structural coarse-graining, as it helps to recover consistent dynamics even in standard MD simula- tions, i.e., consistent barrier crossing dynamics and consistent relative speedup [316, 330]. In fact, us- ing kinetic information as additional input for the parametrization of coarse-grained force fields may improve their quality [337], because it gives more weight to transitional conformations, which are typ- ically not well sampled in standard coarse-graining approaches. In addition, one can manually reintro- duce terms in the dynamical equations that mimic the effect of the interactions between the CG vari- ables and the remaining "irrelevant" degrees of free- dom, i.e., friction and correponding stochastic noise

15

[338], and possibly, memory.

## 1. Dynamic rescaling



Gaining a more quantitative understanding of the dynamic speedup between FG and CG models is an interesting problem of statistical mechanics. One promising approach is excess entropy scaling. The idea goes back to the "principle of corresponding states" as formulated by Helfand and Rice in 1960 [339], which states that, for fluids of particles inter- acting with a potential of the form V(r) = Eu* (r/o), the dynamical and transport properties for differ- ent o and e can be mapped onto each other. For that particular choice of potential, the correspon- dence can be shown by simple dimensional analysis and seems close to trivial, but it does establish an in- teresting correlation between dynamic and thermo- dynamic quantities. Building on this and a method to map simple fluids onto hard sphere fluids [340], Rosenfeld proposed a heuristic approach to identi- fying corresponding states in simple fluids based on their excess entropy [341, 342], which turned out to be remarkably successful both in the dense and di- lute limit. Recently, Rondina et al [343] have shown that excess entropy scaling can also be applied in dense polymer melts. They used a simple bead spring model as a starting point which was coarse- grained to different degrees and showed that the ra- tio of dynamical quantities like the bond relaxation time T or the viscosity n in the CG and FG system followed an exponential law

XCG|XFG = A exp(aASexc) (13)

in a wide temperature range (with X = T or n). Here ASexe is the temperature-dependent excess en- tropy difference between the CG and the FG system which was determined by thermodynamic integra- tion. However, the correspondence was found to be less universal than one might hope, since both a and A depend on the CG model.

Lyubimov, Guenza and coworkers [344-346] have considered CG models that map polymer melts onto a fluid of interacting soft blob, and designed a first- principles approach that allowed them to estimate the speedup factor with remarkable accuracy. They assumed that the speedup factor has two contribu- tions: The first is based on a simple rescaling ac- cording to the principle of corresponding states [339]. The second accounts for the different environments of the interacting units, i.e., the different effective friction constants of monomers that are part of a tagged chain and of tagged CG particle in a melt environment. Both are calculated within mode cou- pling theory [347] and then mapped onto each other.

Using this Ansatz, Guenza et al were able to derive analytical expressions for the dynamic speedup fac- tor of diffusion constants in chemically realistic melts such as polybutadiene [346]. Unfortunately, the cal- culations require a rather involved analytic machin- ery, and extensions to complex inhomogeneous sys- tems and mixtures are not yet available.

## 2. Introducing friction



In particle-based CG models, natural frameworks for introducing friction are the Langevin thermostat, which allows to assign separate friction constants for every CG particle, or the DPD thermostat, which conserves momentum and allows to adjust indepen- dently the friction parameters for every pair of in- teracting CG beads.

A natural generic way to determine CG friction parameters from FG simulations is provided by the Green-Kubo formalism, which relates the friction force experienced by a particle moving at fixed ve- locity to the integral over the time correlation func- tion of the fluctuating forces acting on the particle (the FACF). In the language of linear response the- ory, this expression relates a steady-state generalized "current" (in this case the mean force on the parti- cle), which builds up in response to a constant "ther- modynamic force" (in this case the fixed velocity), to the time-integrated current-current (in this case force-force) correlations. Phrased in this way, one can immediately see why a naïve application of the approach to FG simulation trajectories is dangerous: The velocity of the CG particles is not fixed, instead it fluctuates and averages to zero, and as a result, the integral over the FACF vanishes as well [338]. If the time scales of the dynamics of CG variables and re- maining irrelevant variables are well-separated, one can overcome this problem by monitoring the run- ning Green-Kubo integral as a function of an upper time cutoff. It will then first reach a more or less well-defined plateau before it starts decaying, and the plateau value can be used to extract values for the friction parameter [348]. However, the choice of the time cutoff value remains somewhat heuristic.

One way to overcome this so-called "plateau prob- lem" is to constrain the dynamics of the FG simula- tions such that the momentum of the CG particles is kept fixed. A corresponding bottom-up scheme for determining DPD friction parameters from FG sim- ulations was first proposed by Akkerman and Briels [338] and later derived more formally by Hijón et al [259] based on the Mori-Zwanzig formalism and an additional Markovian assumption. The idea is to modify the dynamics of the FG simulations such that the desired collective CG variables are constrained

16

to fixed values and do not participate in the dynam- ics. This effectively decouples the FG dynamics from the CG dynamics and solves the plateau problem. Hijón et al [259] demonstrated the power of the ap- proach using the example of star polymer melts, and several other authors have later applied it to derive CG DPD models for chemically realistic oligomers or polymers such as n-alkanes [349], polybutadiene [350], and dimethylpropane [351].

## 3. Introducing memory



The strategy of absorbing the full dynamics of the irrelevant variables in a single set of DPD fric- tion parameters is justified if the time scales in the CG model are well separated from those processes in the FG system that have been integrated out [338]. However, if the degree of coarse-graining is compar- atively low, or if the CG model does not capture all slow processes in the FG model, the time scale separation of characteristic processes at the FG and the CG level is incomplete. In such cases, the Mori- Zwanzig projection technique [261] yields CG dy- namical equations that are Non-Markovian, i.e., in- clude memory terms. Two types of approaches have been adopted in the past to account for this effect.

The first is to introduce virtual, but physically motivated variables that mimic the effect of slow processes that have been eliminated in the CG model [352, 353], while not affecting the structural and thermodynamic properties of the CG system. One example are the slip links discussed in Section II C, which are introduced to restore the effect of entan- glements - i.e., the slow dynamics of topological constraints that are removed in extremely coarse- grained models. Wu et al have recently developed a systematic method to derive slip link parameters from experiments or FG simulation data [186]. An- other example is the RaPiD model for polymers de- veloped by Briels and coworkers, which uses the cen- ter of mass of molecules as CG variables, but intro- duces a set of additional virtual variables that char- acterize the conformational state of the molecules [354, 355].

The second approach is to cast the dynamical equations in the CG model in the form of gener- alized Langevin equations (GLEs), i.e., to explic- itly include memory in the CG dynamical equations [13]. Setting up such equations is a highly non-trivial task. In particle-based CG models, one would ide- ally like to use a multidimensional GLE of the type

M;Vi(t) = FC(t)- / ds EKi;(t,s)V;(s)+OF;(t), j

(14)

where Mi and Vi are the mass and velocity of CG particles, FC (t) and OFi(t) the conservative and fluctuating stochastic forces acting on them, and Kij(t, s) is a multidimensional memory kernel that depends on the configuration at time t and s, and which is related to the stochastic force by a fluctuation-dissipation relation

(OF;(t)OFj(s)) = mj EKik(t, s) {Vk(s) Vj(s)) k

equil. kBT Kij(t, s). (15)

Note that we have used a tensor notation here, and the last equality equil. uses the relation (Vj(s) Vk(s)) = 10jkmkkBT, which is valid in ther- modynamic equilibrium. The form (14) has been derived by Kinjo and Hyodo [356] based on Mori- Zwanzig projections and additional approximations [16, 260]. The fluctuation-dissipation relation can also be derived from the Mori-Zwanzig projection operator formalism, but one can show that it is a general feature of GLEs which satisfy an orthog- onality condition for the relation between random force and velocity [357]. Several methods have been developed and analyzed that allow to determine memory kernels from FG simulations and thus con- struct GLE-based CG models in a bottom-up fash- ion [13, 262, 358-372].

The main practical problem with the CG equation (14) is that simulations of such high-dimensional coupled integro-differential equations are computa- tionally very time consuming, mostly due to the high costs associated with the generation of mul- tidimensionally correlated noise that satisfies the fluctuation-dissipation relation. Therefore, simpli- fications must be made. The simplest and most efficient one is to ignore all cross-memory terms and replace Kij(t, s) by a single scalar function, Kij(t, s) = 10ijK(t - s). This approach has been used, among other, by Wang et al [368, 373] to model polymers in dilute solution, and by Klippen- stein et al to model polymer melts [370]. In their ap- proach, Klippenstein et al explicitly address the is- sue of multibody correlations and propose a method to replace them by a single effective self-memory ker- nel. To this end, they introduce a new scheme for consistently including the cross-correlations between the stochastic forces and the conservative interac- tions with the effective medium, which turns out to be quite accurate in their studies of star polymer melts [370] and Asakura-Oosawa fluids [372].

Going beyond pure self-memory kernels, Li and coworkers have suggested an approach, termed "Non-Markovian DPD" (NM-DPD), which decom- poses the memory kernel into a sum of frequency de- pendent DPD friction functions [374-376]. This re- lieves the noise generation problem, as the stochastic

17

forces can then be decomposed in the same pairwise manner. Unfortunately, the approach puts severe constraints on the self-memory part of the memory- kernel Kii, since it assumes Kii = - Ej+i Kij. This can cause problems, e.g., when considering hydrody- namic interactions between CG particles in implicit solvent [364], or diffusion of molecules in penetrant networks [351]. To overcome the problem, Jung et al have developed a more general scheme for recon- structing and treating pair memory kernals that de- couples self- and pair-friction while still ensuring lin- ear scaling for short-ranged pair-interactions [364].

When comparing the two approaches to account for memory in CG systems - physically motivated virtual variables and GLE-based CG models - we should note that the practical solution of GLE equa- tions also often involves the use of auxiliary vari- ables [13]. However, these auxiliary variables are just a numerical trick to solve the GLE and have no physical meaning [254, 377-380]. The idea is to replace the GLE by a set of regular Langevin equa- tions in an extended phase space. This is possible if the memory kernel can be approximated by a fi- nite sum of possibly complex, but decaying expo- nentials (a Prony series) [381]. Alternatively, the parameters of the Langevin equations can be deter- mined directly from correlation functions obtained in FG simulations [368, 369] in a numerically well- controlled manner [369].

## 4. Transition particle-continuum



So far, we have discussed dynamical coarse- graining issues in particle-based models. Closely related problems arise in dynamical coarse-graining from particle to continuum equations, when the CG are dynamic equations for continuous fields. If the fields describe complex fluids, e.g., polymer sys- tems, one again needs to a account for a multi- tude of time scales [383-386] which often precludes the use of, e.g., simple Cahn-Hilliard type equations [387]. Wang et al [210] have considered dynamic den- sity functional (DDFT) equations of the type (6), but with the mobility function replaced by a time- delayed memory function A(r -r';t-t') which they calculated analytically in random phase approxima- tion. They studied the effect of memory on the ordering/disordering kinetics in homopolymer and block copolymer melts and found very good agree- ment between particle-based simulations and contin- uum simulations [210]. One key to success in such an approach is to identify the appropriate CG col- lective variables (densities). Very recently, Müller analyzed this problem [388] by examining three sit- uations where seemingly identical initial density per-

a)

b)

1

0,9

DA.Max

0,8

Local Dyn.

Chain Dyn.

70

^ Debye

V

XN

0,7

0,6

40

O

O Simulation

0,5 -0,5

10000

0 0,5

At [toN]

18

0.5

1

2.5

10

1000

Time (units: ~ Rouse times)

FIG. 6. a) Time evolution of order parameter in a diblock copolymer melt after a sudden quench according to different DDFT models (line) and CG particle-based simulations (symbols). The DDFT functional AT that has been contructed from the particle model. Adapted from Ref. [204]. b) Snapshots during the ordering of a melt of two- scale multiblock copolymers (A5n Bn An Bn An Bn structure) after a sudden deep (top) and shallow (bottom) quench. Adapted from Ref. [382].

turbations were created in different ways, first by ap- plying a modulated force on all segments of a melt, second by applying a force on end segments only, and third by applying a force on a selected middle segment. In particle-based simulations, the dynamic response to these perturbations was found to be very different in the three cases. This could be repro- duced in the continuum simulations if the densities of segments which had experienced the initial force and those of passive segments were treated as sepa- rate collective variables.

From the point of view of dynamic coarse- graining, polymers have the convenient feature that relaxation processes on different time scales can often roughly be associated with different length scales. Therefore, Markovian DDFT models such as (6) may be able to capture the multiscale dynamics if the nonlocal mobility matrix function is adjusted properly A(f-f'). Mantha et al [204] have developed a bottom-up method to construct A(7-71; t-t') from reference FG particle simulations, and found that simulations based on the resulting DDFT model are in very good agreement with corresponding particle- based simulations (see, e.g., Fig. 6). Matching mo- bility matrices is also a convenient way to map dif- ferent CG particle-based polymer models onto each other [382].

One should note, however, that these approaches are restricted to systems close to equilibrium. Far from equilibrium, a CG continuum description op- erating with densities only is certainly not sufficient and one needs to introduce additional variables that characterize the chain conformations [389]. Fur- thermore, polymer stretching generates mechanical stresses, therefore, the use of a purely diffusive dy-

namical model such as (6) (model B dynamics) is no longer justified. An appropriate CG model in such cases must also include momentum and hy- drodynamics. As we have discussed in Sec. IIE, viscoelastic models are quite commonly constructed from molecular polymer models such as the elastic dumbbell model. Up to now, this is mostly based on analytical considerations using substantial mean- field approximations, and to the best of the au- thor's knowledge, systematic bottom-up strategies to construct full viscoelastic models from FG simula- tions are still missing. So far, coarse-graining strate- gies that connect particle models with continuous viscoelastic models are mostly based on parameter mapping [245].

Alternatively, it is sometimes possible to com- bine multiscale approaches with theoretical insights, e.g., from the tube model of viscoelasticity, in or- der to answer specific questions. One example of such a theoretically informed scale bridging scheme is the Branch-on-branch algorithm by McLeish and coworkers [390, 391]. It builds on a theory for the rheology of branched polymers, the so-called Pom- Pom model by Bishko et al [392], which estimates the relaxation modulus of chains for given polymer architectures, requiring only a fuew additional in- put parameters. The Branch-on-branch algorithm establishes a connection between microscopic sim- ulations of the synthesis of highly branched poly- mers and their rheological properties. The micro- scopic simulations are used to generate a represen- tative sample of branched polymers, which are then fed into the theoretical machinery. The method was applied successfully by Read et al commercial Low density polyethylene (LDPE), and recently by Zentel

and coworkers to predict the rheological properties of LDPE and polybutylacrylate (PBA) from the re- action conditions in a miniplant [393-397].

## 5. Accessing late times



So far, we have mainly discussed strategies to in- fer correct and consistent dynamical properties from CG models. However, even though CG simulations can cover much longer time spans than atomistic simulations, this is usually not sufficient to access experimentally relevant time scales of seconds, min- utes, minutes, or even months. In order to do so, one must also coarse-grain in time.

In situations when it is possible to identify sin- gle activated events that slow down the time evolu- tion of a system, one can resort to rare event sam- pling techniques. Typical problems that are consid- ered with such approaches are, e.g., refolding events of molecules or nucleation processes in materials. A large portfolio of methods has been proposed to study them [398], such as weighted ensemble tech- niques [399, 400], transition path sampling [401- 403], Forward Flux Sampling [404-406], the string method [407, 408], or combinations thereof [409]. Using such methods, one can extract rate constants that can be fed into a kinetic model in order to sim- ulate a system on larger time scales.

More generally, one of the most powerful frame- works for coarse graining in time is Markov State Modelling, which has become very popular in the field of biomolecular simulations [410-413]. In Markov State Models (MSMs), the configurational space is partitioned into many regions, called macrostates, and the dynamics is modelled in terms of a master equation by memory-less transitions be- tween these states. The number of macrostates is typically chosen quite large, much larger than, e.g., the number of known metastable configurations of a system. Replacing the original molecular dynam- ics equation by such a relatively fine-grained Marko- vian process thus represents a severe approximation. In reality, the transitions between macrostates usu- ally have some memory of the past. Nevertheless, it can be shown that for optimized mappings, the long- term dynamics is still reproduced very accurately by the MSM, as long as it is governed by a few domi- nant slow time scales [412].

Nowadays, Markov State Modelling is a well- established technique with solid theoretical founda- tions [412]. Techniques are available how to opti- mize the partitioning into macrostates [414], how to determine transition rates and the associated uncer- tainty [415], and even, how to use MSMs to connect theoretical models to experimental trajectory data

19

[416]. Recent Machine learning based approaches of- fer additional opportunities for further optimization [417, 418]. Many of these techniques assume equi- librium, i.e., they require transition rates to fulfill detailed balance. Knoch and Speck have recently considered nonequilibrium MSMs (NE-MSM)s for driven systems [419-421] and shown how to connect MSMs at different CG levels (i.e., with different mi- crostate numbers) in a thermodynamically consis- tent manner. Knoch et al also applied the MSM approach to the non-equilibrium problem of force- driven molecule unfolding and showed that MSMs can be used to bridge between loading rates in sim- ulations to experimentally accessible loading rates [422].

## C. Multiresolution



The ultimate vision of multiscale modelling is to study the properties of a system simultaneously on different scales. Often, it is sufficient to establish one-way communication channels between simula- tions at different CG level. As an example for such a scheme, Fig. 7 shows a strategy to predict the electronic transport properties of polymeric organic materials, which has been developed by Andrienko, and coworkers[423-425]. It relies on a theoretical framework that relates the charge transport in or- ganic semiconducting polymers to their local atom- istic conformations [426-429], based on the Marcus theory of electron transfer rates [430]. In the multi- scale approach of Andrienko and coworkers, coarse- grained and ultra-coarse grained force fields for con- jugated polymers are constructed from atomistic ref- erence simulations. Ultra-coarse grained simulations based on these force-fields are then used to sam- ple large scale morphologies, which serve as starting point to create atomistic configurations by a succes- sive backmapping strategy (see below). From the atomistic structures, a local ionization energy land- scape is constructed, which allows to infer electronic properties such as the charge mobility.

This work flow demonstrates the power of mul- tiscale approaches, however, it does not yet allow to account for possible feedback mechanisms be- tween processes on different scales. One way to include them is provided by the "heterogeneous multiscale" (HMM) framework proposed by E and Engquist in 2003 [431]. The idea is to couple a macroscopic continuum simulation - in their case a fluid dynamics simulations - with microscopic FG simulations, which serve to estimate missing data for the macroscale model on the fly [432- 434]. This approach has recently been applied by Lukacova-Medvidova and coworkers to study non-

Soft coarse-grained

20

Intermediate coarse-grained

CG bonded potentials

Atomistic reference

Atomistic

25 nm

Reference RDF

Morphology

Electronic properties

IE jev]

7.0

(1)6

65

6.0

Single chain sampling

Small atomistic bulk simulation

5.5

2

5.0

Energy

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 x[nm] x [nm]

landscape

FIG. 7. Multiscale strategy for predicting charge transport in polymeric semiconductors [423]. See text for explana- tion. Reprinted from Reference [423] with permission of XXX.

Newtonian flows of shear-thinning polymers melts in complex geometries [435-437]. The HMM idea can also be extended to other types of continuum models. For example, Honda and Kawakatsu [438] and Müller and Daoulas [439] have proposed related mixed-resolution models that concurrently couple time-dependent Ginzburg Landau (TGL) models of (co)polymer blends to more detailed models of the same system: The long-time evolution of the compo- sition profiles is simulated by TGL simulations, but SCF calculations [438] or particle-based simulations [439] are carried out intermittently, using the cur- rent TGL conformation as a basis, to re-adjust the parameters of the TGL model.

In some situations, it may be desirable to study large portions of a system with a coarse-grained model, but be able to zoom into selected regions in space with higher resolution. This concept goes back to the famous quantum mechanical/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) method [440] by Warshel and Levitt, which combines electronic structure calcu- lations in selected regions of space with classical atomistic molecular dynamics in the rest of the sys- tem, separated by a hybrid transition region. In a similar spirit, Prapotnik, delle Site and Kremer in 2005 [441] and de Fabritiis, Delgado-Buscalioni and Coveney in 2006 [442] have proposed mixed resolution dynamical simulation schemes for com- plex fluids that allow zooming into selected regions of space and studying them at higher resolution - the " AdResS" scheme [441] and the "hybrid MD" scheme [442]. Both, however, differ from QM/MM approaches or related approaches involving a CG

outer model [443] in one important aspect: They allow for a particle exchange between the CG and FG regions. The AdResS scheme [441] achieves this by implementing a gradual switch between FG and CG force-fields in a transition region - or, in a later "Hamiltonian-AdResS" variant [444], a switch be- tween interaction potentials - and the hybrid-MD scheme [442] couples a particle model to a contin- uum model via flux boundary conditions and allows to generate and remove particles in the transition region. The approaches have subsequently been re- fined and extended in various directions [445-447], combined with each other [448, 449], and related schemes have been proposed. For example, Qi et al have developed a scheme that couples field-based and particle-based polymer models [450-452] via a spatially varying semi-grandcanonical potential that enforces identity switches [453]. As an interesting new idea for AdResS, Heidari et al [454-456] recently proposed to use an ideal gas as outer medium. While the latter hardly qualifies as a high-level model of a complex soft material, the setup allows to carry out simulations with true open boundaries, to determine absolute free energies for the coupled FG system, and to enforce nonequilibrium situations with, e.g., steady-state current [455].

A crucial component of many multiresolution schemes is backmapping: To connect different lev- els of resolution to each other, one must not only go up the scales by coarse-graining, but also be able to go down, i.e., generate representative microscopic molecular conformations from CG configurations. This is often done in a two-step procedure: First,

a)

conditional in put

generated atom

b)

21

G

Cumene

Octane

C- fake

B

Training

A

A

conditional in put

reference atom

:selected:

:selected:

Syndiotactic polystyrene

Testing

G

B C-real

:selected: :selected: preceding atoms

:selected: generated atom reference atom

:unselected:

:unselected: CG beads

:selected:

FIG. 8. Backmapping strategy for polymer melts based on generative adversarial networks (GANs). (a) Sketch of the approach: A generator network G sequentially samples atom positions depending on the CG structure and the existing atoms. The discriminator C evaluates true and fake configurations based on the discrepancy between reference atoms and generated atoms. The training objective of G is to fool C, and the training objective of C is not to be fooled. Reprinted from Ref. [457] with permission of XXX. (b) A GAN trained on cumene and octane can be used for backmapping of syndiotactic polystyrene. Reprinted from Ref. [458] with permission of XXX.

some heuristic method is used to construct a first guess for the positions of the FG particles, and then, the FG configuration is further optimized by sim- ulated annnealing or another energy minimization method [95, 333, 459-461]. Liu et al have proposed an alternative method based on configurational bias Monte Carlo [462]. The backmapping problem is particularly challenging in the case of proteins, due to their complex chemical structure, and a number of sophisticated methods have been developed for this community. An overview can be found in Ref. [463], Table 3. More recently, machine learning tools borrowed from computer graphics become increas- ingly attractive. The reason is that the backmapping problem has some similarity with typical problems in computer graphics, such as, filling a given rough frame with a representative set of textures. Stieffen- hofer et al [457, 458] and Li et al [464] have recently developed backmapping methods based on deep gen- erative adversarial networks (GANs), a framework where two neural networks - a "generator" and a " discriminator" compete with each other in order to learn the main statistical properties of a training set in an unsupervised manner. Stieffenhofer et al tested their scheme on syndiotactic polystyrene and showed that it can create good backmaps already be- fore energy minimization, and that it is transferable: A GAN trained on melts can be used for backmap- ping of polymer crystals and even chemically similar (small) molecules [457, 458] (see Fig. 8).

An interesting application of multiresolution tools is the generation of equilibrated polymer melt con- figurations for large molecular weight - which is still

a difficult problem in polymer simulations [465]. In traditional approaches, one first prepares a reason- ably random initial configuration, e.g., by assem- bling a number of polymers with typical melt config- urations, and then further relaxes it by implement- ing unphysical dynamics and/or Monte Carlo moves that allow chain crossing or even change chain con- nectivity [466-469]. In multiscale approaches [470- 477], one uses CG simulations to equilibrate the melt and then reconstructs a FG configuration by increasing the level of resolution in a stepwise fash- ion. Tubiana et al have recently performed a sys- tematic comparison of a traditional and multiscale equlibration scheme, focussing on topological indi- cators such as knot distributions [478], and found excellent agreement [479].

## D. Machine-Learning based strategies



Regarding virtually all aspects of scale bridging techniques discussed above, machine-learning (ML) based methods are becoming increasingly impor- tant [100]. Kernel-based techniques or artificial neu- ral networks (ANNs) are used for identifying suit- able CG variables [418, 480], for determining ac- curate atomistic potentials that bridge between ab- initio calculations and standard classical force fields [252, 481] as well as for deriving improved coarse- grained potentials [14, 280, 298, 309, 315, 482], for determining memory kernels from FG simula- tions [368], for constructing MSMs [417, 418], or

for backmapping [457, 458, 464]. In some cases, ANNs can be trained to predict the outcome of CG simulations - such as, e.g., the conformation of heteropolymers for a given monomer sequence [483], the equation of state of homopolymer melts for given pair potential [280], or even complex quantities such as drug-membrane insertion free energies [484]. This opens interesting perspectives for new coarse- graining strategies or new strategies of materials de- sign.

Traditionally, an important application of ML in polymer science has been to predict material prop- erties of interest of polymer based materials or com- posites, such as, e.g., the tribological properties, wear resistance, thermal conductivity [15, 485-488], or even self-assembly [489]. Specifically, ANNs have been used for some time to predict the glass transi- tion temperature Tg, using as input either the chem- ical structure only [490-493], or additional infor- mation from small-scale quantum mechanical cal- culations [494, 495]. Depending on the materi- als, the predictive power can be quite high [496- 504]. Such approaches can be applied, e.g., for identifying promising candidates for "high temper- ature polymers" [505] with high Tg. More gener- ally, a central vision in the emerging field of poly- mer informatics [483, 506-509] is to provide ML tools for the discovery of new interesting poly- mer materials. Ramprasad and coworkers have recently launched a polymer informatics platform (www.polymergenome.org) which offers tools for predicting a variety of polymer properties that in- clude the density, Tg, the melting temperature, the dielectric constant, the tensile strength, and many others [510, 511].

One should note that, in general, extracting new physical insights from ML-based scale bridg- ing strategies is not a trivial task. They can help to unveil hidden structure-property relations or correlations between different material proper- ties [498, 512], but they do not necessarily explain the underlying mechanisms. When used for coarse- graining and force field generation, they can be viewed as being a sophisticated interpolation scheme between available (training) data, but they do not necessarily help to understand general principles of coarse-graining or general features of CG models. On the other hand, feeding in theoretical knowledge of physical principles enhances the efficiency of ML- based procedures and reduces the amount of neces- sary training data [100]. The resulting ML-based models usually have much higher predictive power than the original purely knowledge-based models. Hence knowledge-based and ML-based approaches to scale bridging and multiscale modelling mutually fertilize each other and should be seen as comple-

22

mentary.

## IV. CHALLENGES FOR THE FUTURE



Comparing the available scale-bridging techniques in the last section to the examples of scale-bridging phenomena in polymers in the introduction, it be- comes clear that we still need to go a long way before these two ends meet. Being able to gain a com- prehensive quantitative understanding of real-world phenomena that includes the interplay of structures processes on all relevant scales, from the smallest to the largest, remains a grand challenge of poly- mer science. Several hard problems still need to be solved.

: Strong inhomogeneities. Real polymeric materi- als are usually multiphase materials, they are filled with internal interfaces and their com- position varies dramatically in space. There- fore, the transferability issues that still afflict most CG models represent serious problems that need to be overcome, e.g., by further im- proving coarse-graining strategies or by linking different CG models to each other in a mul- tiresolution sense.

: Defects. Defects are omnipresent in soft materials. They can be defined as very dilute and strongly localized perturbations that may come in sev- eral flavors [513]: As doping defects in the form of local impurities, as connectivity defects that distort the local molecule structure, or as topo- logical defects that do not involve any local chemical modifications, but still locally per- turb the structure in a manner that they can- not be removed without global rearrangements of the whole system (e.g., dislocations). Be- cause they are highly dilute, they are usually not present in small scale simulations unless forced to be there; neverheless, they tend to have a large and long-range impact on the ma- terial properties. In order to study this, small scale simulations should thus capture the effect of a defect that they actually do not contain, and that imparts its presence only, e.g., via non-periodic boundary conditions.

: Nonequilibrium and Processing. As discussed above, many traditional CG concepts are de- veloped for equilibrium systems or at least build on a local equilibrium assumption. On the other hand, already the example of vis- coelastic phase separation shows that in poly- mers, local equilibrium cannot be taken for granted even in seemingly simple problems

such as spinodal phase separation. Most poly- meric materials never reach equilibrium and their properties crucially depend on the way they have been created [34]. Therefore, quan- titative multiscale descriptions must be able to account for processing pathways. The practi- cal importance of nonequilibrium processes in polymer systems has been acknowledged for a long time, and nonequilibrium phenomena as occur, e.g., in polymer rheology, have been a research focus since the beginnings of polymer science. Nevertheless, systematic scale bridg- ing strategies for nonequilibrium polymers are still in their infancy.

: Accessing late times. The time bridging strategies discussed in Sec. III B 5 have mostly been ap- plied to single molecules or simple small sys- tems, and not to materials. In order to un- derstand the properties of polymeric materi- als at late times, depending on environmen- tal conditions, and phenomena such as age- ing, abrasion and wear, failure and fatigue, one must account for all factors listed above (inhomogeneities, defects, processing history) and study their (co-)evolution over a very long time period. So far, theoretical models [514- 516] are mostly based on empirical theories

[1] Gartner, T. E., III; Jayaraman, A. Modeling and Simulations of Polymers: A Roadmap. Macro- molecules 2019, 52, 755-786.

[2] Baschnagel, J .; Binder, K .; Doruker, P .; Gu- sev, A .; Hahn, O .; Kremer, K .; Mattice, W .; Müller-Plathe, F .; Murat, M .; Paul, W .; Santos, S .; Suter, U .; Tries, V. In Advances in Polymer Sci- ence: Viscoelasticity, atomistic models, statisti- cal chemistry; Abe, A., Ed .; Adv. Polym. Sci .; Springer, 2000; Vol. 152; pp 41-156.

[3] Müller-Plathe, F. Coarse-graining in polymer sim- ulation: From the atomistic to the mesoscopic scale and back. ChemPhysChem 2002, 3, 754-769.

[4] Peter, C .; Kremer, K. Multiscale simulation of soft matter systems. Faraday Disc. 2010, 144, 9.

[5] Noid, W. Perspective: Coarse-grained models for biomolecular systems. J. Chem. Phys. 2013, 139, 090901.

[6] Li, Y .; Abberton, B. C .; Kröger, M .; Liu, W. K. Challenges in Multiscale Modeling of Polymer Dy- namics. Polymers 2013, 5, 751-832.

[7] Brini, E .; Algaer, P., E. A. ang Ganguly; Li, C .; Rodriguez-Ropero, F .; van der Vegt, N. System- atic coarse-graining methods for soft matter simu- lations - A review. Soft Matter 2013, 9, 2108.

[8] Saunders, M. G .; Voth, G. A. Coarse-Graining Methods for Computational Biology. Annu. Rev.

23

and with little connection to microscopic sim- ulations.

Multiscale modelling of polymers thus remains a difficult problem, but it also offers exciting new prospects for the future. For example, one fascinat- ing challenge will be to develop systematic multiscale strategies for truly nonequilibrium living polymeric systems as are common in biology, which depend on strongly fluctuating local compositions and are con- stantly driven out of equilibrium.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENT



This work is funded by the German Science Foun- dation within the Collaborative Research Center TRR 146 "multiscale simulation methods for soft matter systems" via Grant 233630050. The author has had the privilege to serva as the spokesperson of this center for many years. She has benefitted from many stimulating discussions and enjoyable interac- tions with all members of this Konsortium, in partic- ular Tristan Bereau, Kostas Daoulas, Gregor Dieze- mann, Burkhard Dünweg, Martin Hanke, Kurt Kre- mer, Arash Nikoubashman, Joe Rudzinski, Thomas Speck, Lukas Stelzl, Nico van der Vegt, Peter Vir- nau, and Michael Wand.

Biophys. 2013, 42, 73-93.

[9] Schieber, J. D .; Andreev, M. In Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vol. 5; Prausnitz, J., Doherty, M., Segalman, R., Eds .; Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular En- gineering; 2014; Vol. 5; pp 367-381.

[10] Bird, R. B .; Giacomin, A. J. In Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vol. 7; Prausnitz, J., Ed .; Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering; 2016; Vol. 7; pp 479- 507.

[11] Rudzinski, J. F. Recent Progress towards Chemically-Specific Coarse-Grained Simulation Models with Consistent Dynamical Properties. Computation 2019, 7, 42.

[12] Ye, T .; Pan, D .; Huang, C .; Liu, M. Smoothed par- ticle hydrodynamics (SPH) for complex fluid flows: Recent developments in methodology and applica- tions. Phys. Fluids 2019, 31, 011301.

[13] Klippenstein, V .; Tripathy, M .; Jung, G .; Schmid, F .; van der Vegt, N. Introducing Memory in Coarse-Grained Molecular Simulations. J. Phys. Chem. B 2021, 125, 4931-4954.

[14] Dhamankar, S .; Webb, M. A. Chemically spe- cific coarse-graining of polymers: Methods and prospects. J. Polym. Sci. 2021, 59, 2613-2643.

[15] Nguyen, D .; Tao, L .; Li, Y. Integration of Machine Learning and Coarse-Grained Molecular Simula- tions for Polymer Materials: Physical Understand- ings and Molecular Design. Frontiers in Chemistry 2022, 9, 820417.

[16] Schilling, T. Coarse-Grained Modelling Out of Equilibrium. Phys. Rep. 2022, 972, 1-45.

[17] Doi, M .; Edwards, S. The theory of polymer dy- namics, ed .; Oxford University Press: New York, 1986.

[18] Piorkowska, E., Rutledge, G. C., Eds. Handbook of Polymer Crystallization, ed .; Wiley: Hoboken, 2013.

[19] Crist, B .; Schultz, J. M. Polymer spherulites: A critical review. Progr. Polym. Sci. 2016, 56, 1-63.

[20] Beran, G. J. O. Modeling Polymorphic Molecular Crystals with Electronic Structure Theory. Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 5567-5613.

[21] Guerra, G .; Vitagliano, V. M .; Derosa, C .; Petrac- cone, V .; Corradini, P. Polymorphism in melt crys- tallized syndiotactic polystyrene samples. Macro- molecules 1990, 23, 1539-1544.

[22] Liu, C .; Kremer, K .; Bereau, T. Polymorphism of Syndiotactic Polystyrene Crystals from Multiscale Simulations. Adv. Theory Simul. 2018, 1, 1800024.

[23] Liu, C .; Brandenburg, J. G .; Valsson, O .; Kre- mer, K .; Bereau, T. Free-energy landscape of polymer-crystal polymorphism. Soft Matter 2020, 16, 9683-9692.

[24] Schulz, M .; Schäfer, M .; Saalwächter, K .; Thurn- Albrecht, T. Competition between crystal growth and intracrystalline chain diffusion determines the lamellar thickness in semicrystalline polymers. Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 1-10.

[25] Sangroniz, L .; Cavallo, D .; Müller, A. J. Self- Nucleation Effects on Polymer Crystallization. Macromolecules 2020, 53, 4581-4604.

[26] Muthukumar, M. Communication: Theory of melt- memory in polymer crystallization. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 145, 031105.

[27] Luo, C .; Sommer, J .- U. Frozen Topology: Entan- glements Control Nucleation and Crystallization in Polymers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 112, 195702.

[28] Luo, C .; Kröger, M .; Sommer, J. U. Entanglements and Crystallization of Concentrated Polymer So- lutions: Molecular Dynamics Simulations. Macro- molecules 2016, 49, 9017-9025.

[29] Luo, C .; Kröger, M .; Sommer, J .- U. Molecular dy- namics simulations of polymer crystallization un- der confinement: Entanglement effect. Polymer 2017, 109, 71-84.

[30] Xiao, H .; Luo, C .; Yan, D .; Sommer, J .- U. Molecu- lar Dynamics Simulation of Crystallization Cyclic Polymer Melts As Compared to Their Linear Counterparts. Macromolecules 2017, 50, 9796- 9806.

[31] Zhaio, Z .; Fusco, C .; Morthomas, J .; Perez, M .; Lame, O. Disentangling and Lamellar Thickening of Linear Polymers during Crystallization: Simu- lation of Bimodal and Unimodal Molecular Weight Distribution Systems. ACS Nano 2019, 13, 11310-

24

## 11319.



[32] Payal, R. S .; Sommer, J .- U. Crystallization of Poly- mers under the Influence of an External Force Field. Polymers 2021, 13, 2078.

[33] Liu, X .; Yu, W. Role of Chain Dynamics in the Melt Memory Effect of Crystallization. Macro- molecules 2020, 53, 7887-7898.

[34] Chandran, S .; Baschnagel, J .; Cangialosi, D .; Fukao, K .; Glynos, E .; Janssen, L. M. C .; Müller, M .; Muthukumar, M .; Steiner, U .; Xu, J .; Napolitano, S .; Reiter, G. Processing Pathways De- cide Polymer Properties at the Molecular Level. Macromolecules 2019, 52, 7146-7156.

[35] Hall, K. W .; Percec, S .; Shinoda, W .; Klein, M. L. Property Decoupling across the Embryonic Nucleus-Melt Interface during Polymer Crys-

tal Nucleation. J. Phys. Chem. B 2020, 124, 4793-4804.

[36] Cui, K .; Ma, Z .; Tian, N .; Su, F .; Liu, D .; Li, L. Multiscale and Multistep Ordering of Flow- Induced Nucleation of Polymers. Chem. Rev. 2018, 118, 1840-1886.

[37] Luo, W .; Wang, J .; Guo, Y .; Hu, W. Role of stress relaxation in stress-induced polymer crystal- lization. Polymer 2021, 235, 124306.

[38] Kearns, K. L .; Scherzer, J .; Chyasnavichyus, M .; Monaenkova, D .; Moore, J .; Sammler, R. L .; Fielitz, T .; Nicholson, D. A .; Andreev, M .; Rut- ledge, G. C. Measuring Flow-Induced Crystal- lization Kinetics of Polyethylene after Processing. Macromolecules 2021, 54, 2101-2112.

[39] Sheng, J .; Chen, W .; Cui, K .; Li, L. Polymer crys- tallization under external flow. Rep. Progr. Phys. 2022, 85, 036601.

[40] Hall, K. W .; Percec, S .; Shinoda, W .; Klein, M. L. Chain-End Modification: A Starting Point for Controlling Polymer Crystal Nucleation. Macro- molecules 2021, 54, 1599-1610.

[41] Flachmüller, A .; Mecking, S .; Peter, C. Coarse- grained model of the aggregation and structure control of polyethylene nanocrystals. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2021, 32, 264001.

[42] Jabbari-Farouji, S .; Rottler, J .; Lame, O .; Makke, A .; Perez, M .; Barrat, J .- L. Plastic Defor- mation Mechanisms of Semicrystalline and Amor- phous Polymers. ACS Macro Lett. 2015, 4, 147- 150.

[43] Jabbari-Farouji, S .; Lame, O .; Perez, M .; Rot- tler, J .; Barrat, J .- L. Role of the Intercrystalline Tie Chains Network in the Mechanical Response of Semicrystalline Polymers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 118, 217802.

[44] Schultz, J. M. Self-Generated Fields and Polymer Crystallization. Macromolecules 2012, 45, 6299- 6323.

[45] Boudenne, A., Ibos, L., Candau, Y., Thomas, S., Eds. Handbook of multiphase polymer systems, ed .; Wiley: Hoboken, 2011.

[46] Shokoohi, S .; Arefazar, A. A review on ternary im- miscible polymer blends: morphology and effective parameters. Pol. Adv. Techn. 2009, 20, 433-447.

[47] Xue, L .; Zhang, J .; Han, Y. Phase separation in- duced ordered patterns in thin polymer blend films. Progr. Polym. Sci. 2012, 37, 564-594.

[48] Castelletto, V .; Hamley, I. W. Morphology of block copolymer melts. Curr. Opn. in Sol. State & Mat. Sci 2004, 8, 426-438.

[49] Orilall, M. C .; Wiesner, U. Block copolymer based composition and morphology control in nanostruc- tured hybrid materials for energy conversion and storage: solar cells, batteries, and fuel cells. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2011, 40, 520-535.

[50] Mai, Y .; Eisenberg, A. Self-assembly of block copolymers. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2012, 41, 5956-5985.

[51] Kang, S .; Kim, G .- H .; Park, S .- Y. Conjugated Block Copolymers for Functional Nanostructures. Acc. Chem. Res. 2022, 55, 2224-2234.

[52] Koohbor, B .; Pagliocca, N .; Youssef, G. A multi- scale experimental approach to characterize micro- to-macro transition length scale in polymer foams. Mechanics of Materials 2021, 161, 104006.

[53] Balazs, A. C .; Emrick, T .; Russell, T. P. Nanopar- ticle polymer composites: Where two small worlds meet. Science 2006, 314, 1107-1110.

[54] Zeng, Q. H .; Yu, A. B .; Lu, G. Q. Multiscale mod- eling and simulation of polymer nanocomposites. Progr. Polym. Sci. 2008, 33, 191-269.

[55] Rueda, M. M .; Auscher, M .- C .; Fulchiron, R .; Perie, T .; Martin, G .; Sonntag, P .; Cassagnau, P. Rheology and applications of highly filled poly- mers: A review of current understanding. Progr. Polym. Sci. 2006, 66, 22-53.

[56] Karatrantos, A .; Composto, R. J .; Winey, K. I .; Kröger, M .; Clarke, N. Modeling of Entangled Polymer Diffusion in Melts and Nanocomposites: A Review. Polymers 2019, 11, 876.

[57] Giunta, G .; Chiricotto, M .; Jackson, I .; Karimi- Varzaneh, H. A .; Carbone, P. Multiscale modelling

of heterogeneous fillers in polymer composites: The case of polyisoprene and carbon black. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2021, 33, 194003.

[58] Sun, R .; Melton, M .; Safaie, N .; Ferrier, R. C., Jr .; Cheng, S .; Liu, Y .; Zuo, X .; Wang, Y. Molecu- lar View on Mechanical Reinforcement in Poly- mer Nanocomposites. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2021, 126, 117801.

[59] Cheng, S .; Bocharova, V .; Belianinov, A .; Xiong, S .; Kisliuk, A .; Somnath, S .; Holt, A. P .; Ovchinnikova, O. S .; Jesse, S .; Martin, H .; Etam- pawala, T .; Dadmun, M .; Sokolov, A. P. Unravel- ing the Mechanism of Nanoscale Mechanical Re- inforcement in Glassy Polymer Nanocomposites. Nano Letters 2016, 16, 3630-3637.

[60] Zhai, S .; Zhang, P .; Xian, Y .; Zeng, J .; Shi, B. Effective thermal conductivity of polymer compos- ites: Theoretical models and simulation models. Int. J. of Heat and Mass Transfer 2018, 117, 358- 374.

[61] Shin, H .; Yang, S .; Chang, S .; Yu, S .; Cho, M. Multiscale homogenization modeling for thermal transport properties of polymer nanocomposites with Kapitza thermal resistance. Polymer 2013,

25

54, 1543-1554.

[62] He, B .; Mortazavi, B .; Zhuang, X .; Rabczuk, T. Modeling Kapitza resistance of two-phase compos- ite material. Composite structures 2016, 152, 939- 946.

[63] Eisoldt, L .; Smith, A .; Scheibel, T. Decoding the secrets of spider silk. Materials Today 2011, 14, 80-86.

[64] Barreiro, D. L .; Yeo, J .; Tarakanova, A .; Martin- Martinez, F. J .; Buehler, M. J. Multiscale Model- ing of Silk and Silk-Based Biomaterials-A Review. Macromolecular Bioscience 2019, 19, 1800253.

[65] Jin, H .; Kaplan, D. Mechanism of silk processing in insects and spiders. Nature 2003, 424, 1057-1061.

[66] Kielty, C. M .; Grant, M. E. In Connective tissue and its heritable disorders; Royce, P. M., Stein- mann, B., Eds .; Wiley, 2002; p 159.

[67] Buehler, M. J. Nature designs tough collagen: Explaining the nanostructure of collagen fibrils. PNAS 2006, 103, 12285.

[68] Shoulders, M. D .; Raines, R. T. Collagen Structure and Stability. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 2009, 78, 929- 958.

[69] Bella, J. Collagen structure: new tricks from a very old dog. Biochem. J. 2016, 473, 1001-1025.

[70] Kar, K .; Amin, P .; Bryan, M. A .; Persikov, A. V .; Mohs, A .; Wang, Y .- H .; Brodsky, B. Self- association of collagen triple helix peptides into higher order structures. J. Biol. Chem. 2006, 281, 33283.

[71] Orgel, J. P. R. O .; Irving, T. C .; Miller, A .; Wess, T. J. Microfibrillar structure of type I colla- gen in situ. PNAS 2006, 103, 9001.

[72] Leikina, E .; Mertts, M. V .; Kuynetsova, N .; Leikin, S. Type I collagen is thermally unstable at body temperature. PNAS 2002, 99, 1314.

[73] Brown, G. N .; Sattler, R. L .; Guo, X. E. Experi- mental studies of bone mechanoadaptation: bridg- ing in vitro and in vivo studies with multiscale sys- tems. Interface focus 2016, 6, 20150071.

[74] Garcia-Aznar, J. M .; Nasello, G .; Hervas-Raluy, S .; Perez, M. A .; Gomez-Benito, M. J. Multiscale modeling of bone tissue mechanobiology. Bone 2021, 151, 116032.

[75] Allain, J .- M .; Lynch, B .; Schanne-Klein, M .- C. In Skin Biophysics: From Experimental Characteri- zation to Advanced Modelling; Limbert, G., Ed .; Studies in Mechanobiology Tissue Engineering and Biomaterials; 2019; Vol. 22; pp 235-263.

[76] Shelley, M. J. In Ann. Rev. Fluid Mech., Vol. 48; Davis, S., Moin, P., Eds .; Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics; 2016; Vol. 48; pp 487-506.[77] Powers, J. D .; Malingen, S. A .; Regnier, M .; Daniel, T. L. In Annual Review of Biophysics, Vol 50, 2021; Dill, K., Ed .; Annual Review of Bio- physics; 2021; Vol. 50; pp 373-400.

[78] Hyman, A. A .; Weber, C. A .; Juelicher, F. In An- nual Review of Cell and Development Biology, Vol. 30; Schekman, R., Lehmann, R., Eds .; Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology; 2014; Vol. 30; pp 39-58.

[79] Shin, Y .; Brangwynne, C. P. Liquid phase conden- sation in cell physiology and disease. Science 2017, 357, 6357.

[80] Boeynaems, S .; Alberti, S .; Fawzi, N. L .; Mittag, T .; Polymenidou, M .; Rousseau, F .; Schymkowitz, J .; Shorter, J .; Wolozin, B .; Van den Bosch, L .; Tompa, P .; Fuxreiter, M. Protein Phase Separation: A New Phase in Cell Biology. Trends in Cell Biology 2018, 28, 420-435.

[81] Berry, J .; Brangwynne, C. P .; Haataja, M. Physical principles of intracellular organization via active and passive phase transitions. Rep. Progr. Phys. 2018, 80, 046601.

[82] Posey, A. E .; Holehouse, A. S .; Pappu, R. V. In Intrinsically disordered proteins; Rhoades, E., Ed .; Methods in Enzymology; 2018; Vol. 611; pp 1-30.

[83] Alberti, S .; Dormann, D. In Ann. Rev. Genetics, Vol 53; Bonini, N., Ed .; Annual Review of Genet- ics; 2019; Vol. 53; pp 171+.

[84] Choi, J .- M .; Holehouse, A. S .; Pappu, R. V. In An- nual Review of Biophysics, Vol 49, 2020; Dill, K., Ed .; Annual Review of Biophysics; 2020; Vol. 49; pp 107-133.

[85] Lyon, A. S .; Peeples, W. B .; Rosen, M. K. A frame- work for understanding the functions of biomolec- ular condensates across scales. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2021, 22, 215-235.

[86] Baschnagel, J .; Binder, K .; Paul, W .; Laso, M .; Suter, U. W .; Batoulis, I .; Jilge, W .; Burger, T. On the construction of coarse-grained models for linear flexible polymer chains - distribution functions for groups of consecutive monomers. J. Chem. Phys. 1991, 95, 6014-6025.

[87] Rapold, R. F .; Mattice, W. L. Introduction of short and long range energies to simulate real chains on the 2nnd lattice. Macromolecules 1996, 29, 2457- 2466.

[88] Tries, V .; Paul, W .; Baschnagel, J .; Binder, K. Modeling polyethylene with the bond fluctuation model. J. Chem. Phys. 1997, 106, 738-748. [89] Cho, J .; Mattice, W. Estimation of long-range interaction in coarse-grained rotational isomeric state polyethylene chains on a high coordination lattice. Macromolecules 1997, 30, 637-644.

[90] Doruker, P .; Mattice, W. Reverse mapping of coarse-grained polyethylene chains from the second nearest neighbor diamond lattice to an atomistic model in continuous space. Macromolecules 1997, 30, 5520-5526.

[91] Doruker, P .; Mattice, W. Dynamics of bulk polyethylene on a high coordination lattice. Macro- mol. Symp. 1998, 133, 47-70.

[92] Paul, W .; Binder, K .; Kremer, K .; Heer- mann, D. W. Structure property correlation of polymers, A Monte Carlo Approach. Macro- molecules 1991, 24, 6332-6334.

[93] Paul, W .; Pistoor, N. A Mapping of realistic onto abstract polymer models and an application to 2 bisphenol polycarbonates. Macromolecules 1994, 27, 1249-1255.

26

[94] Tschöp, W .; Kremer, K .; Batoulis, J .; Bürger, T .; Hahn, O. Simulation of polymer melts. I. Coarse- graining procedure for polycarbonates. Acta Poly- merica 1998, 49, 61-74.

[95] Tschop, W .; Kremer, K .; Hahn, O .; Batoulis, J .; Bürger, T. Simulation of polymer melts. II. From coarse-grained models back to atomistic descrip- tion. Acta Polymerica 1998, 49, 75-79.

[96] Eilhard, J .; Zirkel, A .; Tschop, W .; Hahn, O .; Kre- mer, K .; Scharpf, O .; Richter, D .; Buchenau, U. Spatial correlations in polycarbonates: Neutron scattering and simulation. J. Chem. Phys. 1999, 110, 1819-1830.

[97] Doruker, P .; Rapold, R .; Mattice, W. Rotational isomeric state models for polyoxyethylene and polythiaethylene on a high coordination lattice. J. Chem. Phys. 1996, 104, 8742-8749.

[98] Haliloglu, T .; Mattice, W. Mapping of rotational isomeric state chains with asymmetric torsional po- tential energy functions on a high coordination lat- tice: Application to polypropylene. J. Chem. Phys. 1998, 108, 6989-6995.

[99] Padding, J. T .; Briels, W. J. Systematic coarse- graining of the dynamics of entangled polymer melts: the road from chemistry to rheology. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2011, 23, 233101.

[100] Noé, F .; Tkatchenko, A .; Müller, K .- R .; Clementi, C. Machine Learning for Molecular Simulations. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2020, 71, 361-390.

[101] Barton, A. F. M. Handbook of Polymer-Liquid In- teraction Parameters and Solubility Parameters, ed .; CRC press: Boca Raton, 1990.

[102] Hatakeyama, H .; Hatakeyama, T. Interaction be- tween water and hydrophilic polymers. Ther- mochimica Acta 1998, 308, 3-22, 14th IUPAC Conference on Chemical Thermodynamics, OS- AKA, JAPAN, AUG 25-30, 1996.

[103] Heinz, H .; Ramezani-Dakhel, H. Simulations of inorganic-bioorganic interfaces to discover new ma- terials: insights, comparisons to experiment, chal- lenges, and opportunities. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2016, 45, 412-448.

[104] Braunecker, W. A .; Matyjaszewski, K. Con- trolled/living radical polymerization: Features, de- velopments, and perspectives. Progr. Polym. Sci. 2009, 32, 93-146.

[105] Vega-Hernandez, M. A .; Cano-Díaz, G. S .; Vivaldo-Lima, E .; Rosas-Aburto, A .; Hernández- Luna, M. G .; Martinez, A .; Palacios-Alquisira, J .; Mohammadi, Y .; Penlidis, A. A Review on the Synthesis, Characterization, and Modeling of Poly- mer Grafting. Processes 2021, 9, 375.

[106] Rappe, A. K .; Goddard III, W. A. Charge Equi- libration for Molecular Dynamics Simulations. J. Phys. Chem. 1991, 95, 3358-3363.

[107] Wilmer, C. E .; Kim, K. C .; Snurr, R. Q. An Extended Charge Equilibration Method. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2012, 3, 2506-2511.

[108] Wu, J. Density functional theory for chemical en- gineering: From capillarity to soft materials. Aiche

J. 2006, 52, 1169-1193.

[109] Dovesi, R .; Erba, A .; Orlando, R .; Zicovich- Wilson, C. M .; Civalleri, B .; Maschio, L .; Rerat, M .; Casassa, S .; Baima, J .; Salustro, S .; Kirtman, B. Quantum-mechanical condensed mat- ter simulations with CRYSTAL. Wiley Interdisc. Rev. - Comp. Mol. Sci. 2018, 8, e1360.

[110] Sozlc, K., Ed. Polymer compatibility and incom- patibility: Principles and Practices, ed .; Harwood Academic Publishers, MMI Press: Chur, Switzer- land, New York, 1982.

[111] Boroudjerdi, H .; Kim, Y .; Naji, A .; Netz, R .; Schlagberger, X .; Serr, A. Statics and dynamics of strongly charged soft matter. Phys. Rep. 2005, 416, 129-199.

[112] Mukherji, D .; Marques, C. M. M .; Kremer, K. Polymer collapse in miscible good solvents is a generic phenomenon driven by preferential adsorp- tion. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 4882.

[113] Li, X .; Wang, N .; Ma, Y .; Ji, X .; Huang, Y .; Huang, X .; Wang, T .; Zhou, L .; Hao, H. Revealing the Molecular Mechanism of Cosolvency Based on Thermodynamic Phase Diagram, Molecular Simu- lation, and Spectrum Analysis: The Tolbutamide Case. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2022, 13, 1628-1635.

[114] Marrink, S. J .; Risselada, H. J .; Yefimov, S .; Tiele- man, D. P .; de Vries, A. H. The MARTINI force field: coarse grained model for biomolecular simu- lations. J. Phys. Chem. B 2007, 111, 7812-7824.

[115] De Gennes, P. G. Scaling Concepts in Polymer Physics, ed .; Cornell University Press: Ithaca and London, 1979.

[116] Rubinstein, M .; Colby, R. H. Polymer Physics; Ox- ford University Press: Oxford, 2003.

[117] Halperin, A. In Soft Order in Physical Systems; Rabin, Y., Bruinsma, R., Eds .; Springer, 1994; pp 33-56.

[118] Das, R. K .; Pappu, R. V. Conformations of intrin- sically disordered proteins are influenced by lin- ear sequence distributions of oppositely charged residues. PNAS 2013, 110, 13392-13397.

[119] Pomposo, J. A .; Perez-Baena, I .; Lo Verso, F .; Moreno, A. J .; Arbe, A .; Colmenero, J. How Far Are Single-Chain Polymer Nanoparticles in Solu- tion from the Globular State? ACS Macro Lett. 2014, 3, 767-772.

[120] Soranno, A .; Koenig, I .; Borgia, M. B .; Hof- mann, H .; Zosel, F .; Nettels, D .; Schuler, B. Single-molecule spectroscopy reveals polymer ef- fects of disordered proteins in crowded environ- ments. PNAS 2014, 111, 4874-4879.

[121] Carmesin, I .; Kremer, K. The Bond Fluctuation Method - A new effective algorithm for the dynam- ics of polymers in all spatial dimensions. Macro- molecules 1988, 21, 2819-2823.[122] Grest, G. S .; Kremer, K. Molecular-dynamics sim- ulation for polymer in the presence of a heat bath. Phys. Rev. A 1986, 33, 3628-3631.

[123] Faller, R .; Kolb, A .; Müller-Plathe, F. Local chain ordering in amorphous polymer melts: influence of chain stiffness. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 1999, 1,

27## 2071-2076.



[124] Hsu, H .- P. Monte Carlo simulations of lattice mod- els for single polymer systems. J. Chem. Phys. 2014, 141, 164903.

[125] Deutsch, H. P .; Binder, K. Interdiffusion and self- diffusion in polymer mixtures - A Monte Carlo Study. J. Chem. Phys. 1991, 94, 2294-2304.

[126] Ahlrichs, P .; Dünweg, B. Simulation of a sin- gle polymer chain in solution by combining lat- tice Boltzmann and molecular dynamics. J. Chem. Phys. 1999, 111, 8225-8239.

[127] Paul, W .; Binder, K .; Heermann, D. W .; Kre- mer, K. Crossover scaling in semidilute polymer solutions - A Monte Carlo test. J. de Physique II 1991, 1, 37-60.

[128] van den Oever, J .; Leermakers, F .; Fleer, G .; Ivanov, V .; Shusharina, N .; Khokhlov, A .; Kha- latur, P. Coil-globule transition for regular, ran- dom, and specially designed copolymers: Monte Carlo simulation and self-consistent field theory. Phys. Rev. E 2002, 65, 041708.

[129] Binder, K .; Baschnagel, J .; Müller, M .; Paul, W .; Rampf, F. Simulation of phase transitions of sin- gle polymer chains: Recent advances. Macromol. Symp. 2006, 237, 128-138, 5th International Sym- posium on Molecular Mobility and Order in Poly- mer Systems, St Petersburg, RUSSIA, JUN 20-24, 2005.

[130] Luettmer-Strathmann, J .; Rampf, F .; Paul, W .; Binder, K. Transitions of tethered polymer chains: A simulation study with the bond fluctuation lat- tice model. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 128, 064903.

[131] Müller, M. Miscibility behavior and single chain properties in polymer blends: a bond fluctuation model study. Macromol. Theory Sim. 1999, 8, 343-374.

[132] Ray, P .; Baschnagel, J .; Binder, K. Dynamics near the glass-transition in 2-dimensional polymer melts - A Monte Carlo simulation study. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 1993, 5, 5731-5742.

[133] Binder, K .; Baschnagel, J .; Paul, W. Glass transi- tion of polymer melts: test of theoretical concepts by computer simulation. Progr. Polym. Sci. 2003, 28, 115-172.

[134] Radosz, W .; Pawlik, G .; Mitus, A. C. Characteri- zation of Monte Carlo Dynamic/Kinetic Properties of Local Structure in Bond Fluctuation Model of Polymer System. Materials 2021, 14, 4962.

[135] Everaers, R .; Karimi-Varzaneh, H. A .; Fleck, F .; Hojdis, N .; Svaneborg, C. Kremer-Grest Models for Commodity Polymer Melts: Linking Theory, Experiment, and Simulation at the Kuhn Scale. Macromolecules 2020, 53, 1901-1916.

[136] Everaers, R .; Sukumaran, S .; Grest, G .; Svaneborg, C .; Sivasubramanian, A .; Kremer, K. Rheology and microscopic topology of entangled polymeric liquids. Science 2004, 303, 823-826.

[137] Milner, S. T. Unified Entanglement Scaling for Flexible, Semiflexible, and Stiff Polymer Melts and Solutions. Macromolecules 2020, 53, 1314-1325.

[138] Pagonabarraga, I .; Frenkel, D. Dissipative particle dynamics for interacting systems. J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 115, 5015.

[139] Groot, R. D .; Warren, P. B. Dissipative particle dynamics: Bridging the gap between atomistic and mesoscopic simulation. J. Chem. Phys. 1997, 107, 4423-4435.

[140] Laso, M .; Öttinger, H. C .; Suter, U. W. Bond- length and bond-angle distributions in coarse- grained polymer chains. J. Chem. Phys. 1991, 95, 2178-2182.

[141] Murat, M .; Kremer, K. From many monomers to many polymers: Soft ellipsoid model for polymer melts and mixtures. J. Chem. Phys. 1998, 108, 4340-4348.

[142] Likos, C. Effective interactions in soft condensed matter physics. Phys. Rep. 2001, 348, 267-439.

[143] Bolhuis, P. G .; Louis, A. A .; Hansen, J. P .; Mei- jer, E. J. Accurate effective pair potentials for poly- mer solutions. J. Chem. Phys. 2001, 114, 4296- 4311.

[144] Eurich, F .; Maass, P. Soft ellipsoid model for Gaus- sian polymer chains. J. Chem. Phys. 2001, 114, 7655-7668.

[145] Vettorel, T .; Besold, G .; Kremer, K. Fluctuating soft-sphere approach to coarse-graining of polymer models. Soft Matter 2010, 6, 2282-2292.

[146] Narros, A .; Likos, C. N .; Moreno, A. J .; Capone, B. Multi-blob coarse-graining for ring polymer solu- tions. Soft Matter 2014, 10, 9601.

[147] D'Adamo, G .; Menichetti, R .; Pelissetto, A .; Pier- leoni, C. Coarse-graining polymer solutions: A critical appraisal of single- and multi-site models. Eur. Phys. J. - Spec. Topics 2015, 224, 2239-2267.

[148] Laradji, M .; Guo, H .; Zuckermann, M. J. Off- lattice Monte-Carlo simulation of polymer brushes in good solvents. Phys. Rev. E 1994, 49, 3199- 3206.

[149] Besold, G .; Guo, H .; Zuckermann, M. Off-lattice Monte Carlo simulation of the discrete Edwards model. J. Polym. Sci. B 2000, 38, 1053-1068.

[150] Ganesan, V .; Pryamitsyn, V. Dynamical mean- field theory for inhomogeneous polymeric systems. J. Chem. Phys. 2003, 118, 4345-4348.

[151] Detcheverry, F. A .; Kang, H .; Daoulas, K. C .; Müller, M .; Nealey, P. F .; dePablo, J. J. Monte Carlo Simulations of a Coarse Grain Model for Block Copolymers and Nanocomposites. Macro- molecules 2008, 41, 4989-5001.

[152] Milano, G .; Kawakatsu, T. Hybrid particle-field molecular dynamics simulations for dense polymer systems. J. Chem. Phys. 2009, 130, 214106.

[153] Wang, Q .; Yin, Y. Fast off-lattice Monte Carlo sim- ulations with "soft" repulsive potentials. J. Chem. Phys. 2009, 130, 104903.

[154] Müller, M. Studying Amphiphilic Self-assembly with Soft Coarse-Grained Models. J. Stat. Phys. 2011, 145, 967-1016.

[155] Zhang, J .; Mukherji, D .; Daoulas, K. C. Studying PMMA films on silica surfaces with generic micro- scopic and mesoscale models. Eur. Phys. J. - Spec.

28

Topics 2016, 225, 1423-1440.

[156] Bore, S. L .; Cascella, M. Hamiltonian and alias-free hybrid particle-field molecular dynamics. J. Chem. Phys. 2021, 153, 094106.

[157] Homberg, M .; Müller, M. Main phase transition in lipid bilayers: Phase coexistence and line tension in a soft, solvent-free, coarse-grained model. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 132, 155104.

[158] Zhang, S .; Qi, S .; Klushin, L. I .; Skvortsov, A. M .; Yan, D .; Schmid, F. Anomalous critical slowdown at a first order phase transition in single polymer chains. J. Chem. Phys. 2017, 147, 064902.

[159] Zhang, S .; Qi, S .; Klushin, L. I .; Skvortsov, A. M .; Yan, D .; Schmid, F. Phase transitions in sin- gle macromolecules: Loop-stretch transition versus loop adsorption transition in end-grafted polymer chains. J. Chem. Phys. 2018, 148, 044903.

[160] Sevink, G. J. A .; Schmid, F .; Kawakatsu, T .; Mi- lano, G. Combining cell-based hydrodynamics with hybrid particle-field simulations: efficient and real- istic simulation of structuring dynamics. Soft Mat- ter 2017, 13, 1594-1623.

[161] Daoulas, K. C .; Ruehle, V .; Kremer, K. Simula- tions of nematic homopolymer melts using particle- based models with interactions expressed through collective variables. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2012, 24, 284121.

[162] Duplantier, B .; Saleur, H. Exact surface and wedge exponents for polymers in 2 dimensions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1986, 57, 3179-3182.

[163] Duplantier, B .; Saleur, H. Exadt tricritical expo- nents for polymers at the theta-point in 2 dimen- sions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1987, 59, 539-542.

[164] Semenov, A .; Johner, A. Theoretical notes on dense polymers in two dimensions. Eur. Phys. J. E 2003, 12, 469-480.

[165] Cavallo, A .; Müller, M .; Binder, K. Unmixing of polymer blends confined in ultrathin films: Crossover between two-dimensional and three- dimensional behavior. J. Phys. Chem. B 2005, 109, 6544-6552.

[166] Cavallo, A .; Müller, M .; Wittmer, J .; Johner, A .; Binder, K. Single chain structure in thin polymer films: Corrections to Flory's and Silberberg's hy- potheses. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2005, 17, S1697- S1709.

[167] Meyer, H .; Wittmer, J. P .; Kreer, T .; Johner, A .; Baschnagel, J. Static properties of polymer melts in two dimensions. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 132, 184904.

[168] Halverson, J. D .; Lee, W. B .; Grest, G. S .; Gros- berg, A. Y .; Kremer, K. Molecular dynamics simu- lation study of nonconcatenated ring polymers in a melt. I. Statics. J. Chem. Phys. 2011, 134, 204904.

[169] Rosa, A .; Everaers, R. Ring Polymers in the Melt State: The Physics of Crumpling. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 112, 118302.

[170] Everaers, R .; Grosberg, A. Y .; Rubinstein, M .; Rosa, A. Flory theory of randomly branched poly- mers. Soft Matter 2017, 13, 1223-1234.

[171] Chubak, I .; Likos, C. N .; Egorov, S. A. Multiscale Approaches for Confining Ring Polymer Solutions. J. Phys. Chem. B 2021, 125, 4910-4923.

[172] Zhang, J .; Meyer, H .; Virnau, P .; Daoulas, K. C. Can Soft Models Describe Polymer Knots? Macro- molecules 2020, 53, 10475-10486.[173] Wu, Z .; Alberti, S. A. N .; Schneider, J .; Müller- Plathe, F. Knotting behaviour of polymer chains in the melt state for soft-core models with and with- out slip-springs. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2021, 33, 244001.

[174] Masubuchi, Y. In Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vol. 5; Prausnitz, J., Doherty, M., Segalman, R., Eds .; Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering; 2014; Vol. 5; pp 11-33.

[175] Behbahani, A. F .; Schneider, L .; Rissanou, A .; Chazirakis, A .; Bacova, P .; Jana, P. K .; Li, W .; Doxastakis, M .; Polinska, P .; Burkhart, C .; Müller, M .; Harmandaris, V. A. Dynamics and Rheology of Polymer Melts via Hierarchical Atom- istic, Coarse-Grained, and Slip-Spring Simulations. Macromolecules 2021, 54, 2740-2762.

[176] Padding, J .; Briels, W. Uncrossability constraints in mesoscopic polymer melt simulations: Non- Rouse behavior of C120H242. J. Chem. Phys. 2001, 115, 2846-2859.

[177] Schieber, J. Fluctuations in entanglements of poly- mer liquids. J. Chem. Phys. 2003, 118, 5162-5166.

[178] Likhtman, A. Single-chain slip-link model of entan- gled polymers: Simultaneous description of neu- tron spin-echo, rheology, and diffusion. Macro- molecules 2005, 38, 6128-6139.

[179] Müller, M .; Daoulas, K. C. Single-chain dynamics in a homogeneous melt and a lamellar microphase: A comparison between Smart Monte Carlo dynam- ics, slithering-snake dynamics, and slip-link dy- namics. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 129, 164906.

[180] Steenbakkers, R.

J. A .; Andreev, M .; Schieber, J. D. Thermodynamically consistent incorporation of entanglement spatial fluctuations in the slip-link model. Phys. Rev. E 2021, 103, 022501.

[181] Uneyama, T .; Masubuchi, Y. Multi-chain slip- spring model for entangled polymer dynamics. J. Chem. Phys. 2012, 137, 154902.

[182] Chappa, V. C .; Morse, D. C .; Zippelius, A .; Müller, M. Translationally Invariant Slip-Spring Model for Entangled Polymer Dynamics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 148302.

[183] Ramirez-Hernandez, A .; Peters, B. L .; An- dreev, M .; Schieber, J. D .; de Pablo, J. J. A multi- chain polymer slip-spring model with fluctuating number of entanglements for linear and nonlinear rheology. J. Chem. Phys. 2015, 143, 243147.

[184] Ramirez-Hernandez, A .; Peters, B. L .; Schnei- der, L .; Andreev, M .; Schieber, J. D .; Müller, M .; de Pablo, J. J. A multi-chain polymer slip-spring model with fluctuating number of entanglements: Density fluctuations, confinement, and phase sep- aration. J. Chem. Phys. 2017, 146, 014903.

29

[185] Wu, Z .; Kalogirou, A .; De Nicola, A .; Milano, G .; Müller-Plathe, F. Atomistic hybrid particle-field molecular dynamics combined with slip-springs: Restoring entangled dynamics to simulations of polymer melts. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2021, 42, 6-18.

[186] Wu, Z .; Milano, G .; Müller-Plathe, F. Combina- tion of Hybrid Particle-Field Molecular Dynam- ics and Slip-Springs for the Efficient Simulation of Coarse-Grained Polymer Models: Static and Dy- namic Properties of Polystyrene Melts. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2021, 17, 474-487.

[187] Najafi, S .; Lin, Y .; Longhini, A. P .; Zhang, X .; Delaney, K. T .; Kosik, K. S .; Fredrickson, G. H .; Shea, J .- E .; Han, S. Liquid-liquid phase separation of Tau by self and complex coacervation. Protein Science 2021, 30, 1393-1407.

[188] Fredrickson, G. H. The Equilibrium Theory of In- homogeneous Polymers; Oxford University Press: Oxford, 2013.

[189] Delaney, K. T .; Fredrickson, G. H. Recent Devel- opments in Fully Fluctuating Field-Theoretic Sim- ulations of polymer melts and solutions. J. Phys. Chem. B 2016, 120, 7615.

[190] Matsen, M. Field theoretic approach for block copolymer melts: SCFT and FTS. J. Chem. Phys. 2020, 152, 110901.

[191] Schmid, F. Self-consistent-field theories for com- plex fluids. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 1998, 10, 8105- 8138.

[192] Schmid, F. Handbook of Multiphase Polymer Sys- tems; Wiley-Blackwell, 2011; Chapter 3, pp 31-80.

[193] Matsen, M. The standard Gaussian model for block copolymer melts. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2002, 14, R21-R47.

[194] Kawasaki, T .; Sekimoto, K. Dynamic theory of polymer melt morphology. Physica A 1987, 143, 349-413.

[195] Kawasaki, K .; Sekimoto, K. Morphology dynamics of block copolymer systems. Physica A 1988, 148, 361-413.

[196] Fraaije, J. G. E. M. Dynamic Density Func- tional Theory for Microphase Separation Kinetics of Block Copolymer Melts. J. Chem. Phys. 1993, 99, 9202-9212.

[197] Fraaije, J. G. E. M .; van Vlimmeren, B. A. C .; Maurits, N. M .; Postma, M .; Evers, O. A .; Hoff- mann, C .; Altevogt, P .; Goldbeck-Wood, G. The dynamic mean-field density functional method and its application to the mesoscopic dynamics of quenched block copolymer melts. J. Chem. Phys. 1997, 106, 4260-4269.

[198] Maurits, N. M .; Fraaije, J. G. E. M. Mesoscopic dynamics of copolymer melts: From density dy- namics to external potential dynamics using non- local kinetic coupling. J. Chem. Phys. 1997, 107, 5879-5889.

[199] Kawakatsu, T .; Doi, M .; Hasegawa, R. Dynamic density functional approach to phase separation dynamics of polymer systems. Intn. J. Mod. Phys. C 1999, 10, 1531-1540.

[200] Morita, H .; Kawakatsu, T .; Doi, M. Dynamic den- sity functional study on the structure of thin poly- mer blend films with a free surface. Macromolecules 2001, 34, 8777-8783.

[201] Reister, E .; Müller, M .; Binder, K. Spinodal de- composition in a binary polymer mixture: Dy- namic self-consistent-field theory and Monte Carlo simulations. Phys. Rev. E 2001, 64, 041804.

[202] Müller, M .; Schmid, F. In Advanced computer simulation approaches for soft matter sciences II; Holm, C., Kremer, K., Eds .; Advances in Polymer Science; Springer, 2005; Vol. 185; pp 1-58.

[203] Qi, S .; Schmid, F. Dynamic Density Functional Theories for Inhomogeneous Polymer Systems Compared to Brownian Dynamics Simulations. Macromolecules 2017, 50, 9831-9845.

[204] Mantha, S .; Qi, S .; Schmid, F. Bottom-up Con- struction of Dynamic Density Functional Theo- ries for Inhomogeneous Polymer Systems from Mi- croscopic Simulations. Macromolecules 2020, 53, 3409-3423.

[205] Schmid, F .; Li, B. Dynamic Self-Consistent Field Approach for Studying Kinetic Processes in Multi- block Copolymer Melts. Polymers 2020, 12, 2205.

[206] Honda, T .; Kawakatsu, T. Hydrodynamic ef- fects on the disorder-to-order transitions of di- block copolymer melts. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 129, 114904.

[207] Maurits, N. M .; Zvelindovsky, A. V .; Sevink, G. J. A .; van Vlimmeren, B. A. C .; Fraaije, J. G. E. M. Hydrodynamic effects in three-dimensional microphase separation of block copolymers: Dy- namic mean-field density functional approach. J. Chem. Phys. 1998, 108, 9150-9154.

[208] Zhang, L .; Sevink, A .; Schmid, F. Hybrid Lattice Boltzmann/Dynamic Self-Consistent Field Simula- tions of Microphase Separation and Vesicle Forma- tion in Block Copolymer Systems. Macromolecules 2011, 44, 9434-9447.

[209] Heuser, J .; Sevink, G. J. A .; Schmid, F. Self- Assembly of Polymeric Particles in Poiseuille Flow: A Hybrid Lattice Boltzmann/External Poten- tial Dynamics Simulation Study. Macromolecules 2017, 50, 4474-4490.

[210] Wang, G .; Ren, Y .; Müller, M. Collective short- time dynamics in multicomponent polymer melts. Macromolecules 2019, 52, 7704-7720.

[211] Rottler, J .; Müller, M. Efficient pathways of block copolymer directed self-assembly: Insights from ef- ficient continuum modeling. ACS Nano 2020, 14, 13986-13994.

[212] Ganesan, V .; Fredrickson, G. Field-theoretic poly- mer simulations. EPL 2001, 55, 814-820.

[213] Lindsay, B. J .; Composto, R. J .; Riggleman, R. A. Equilibrium Field Theoretic Study of Nanoparticle Interactions in Diblock Copolymer Melts. J. Phys. Chem. B 2019, 123, 9466-9480.

[214] McCarty, J .; Delaney, K. T .; Danielsen, S. P. O .; Fredrickson, G. H .; Shea, J .- E. Complete Phase Diagram for Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation of Intrinsically Disordered Proteins. J. Phys. Chem.

30

Lett. 2019, 10, 1644-1652.

[215] Vorselaars, B .; Spencer, R. K. W .; Matsen, M. W. Instability of the Microemulsion Channel in Block Copolymer-Homopolymer Blends. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020, 125, 117801.

[216] Spencer, R. K. W .; Matsen, M. W. Coexistence of Polymeric Microemulsion with Homopolymer-Rich Phases. Macromolecules 2021, 54, 1329-1337.

[217] Matsen, M. W .; Beardsley, T. M. Field-Theoretic Simulations for Block Copolymer Melts Using the Partial Saddle-Point Approximation. Polymers 2021, 13, 2437.

[218] Duchs, D .; Ganesan, V .; Fredrickson, G. H .; Schmid, F. Fluctuation Effects in Ternary AB+A+B Polymeric Emulsions. Macromolecules 2003, 36, 9237-9248.

[219] Duchs, D .; Schmid, F. Formation and structure of the microemulsion phase in two-dimensional ternary AB+A+B polymeric emulsions. J. Chem. Phys. 2004, 121, 2798-2805.[220] Alexander-Katz, A .; Fredrickson, G. Diblock Copolymer Thin Films: A Field-Theoretic Simula- tion Study. Macromolecules 2007, 40, 4075-4087.

[221] Zappalá, D. Indications of isotropic Lifshitz points in four dimensions. Phys. Rev. D 2018, 98, 085005.

[222] Brunk, A .; Lukáčová-Medvid'ová, M. Global exis- tence of weak solutions to viscoelastic phase sep- aration: part II. Degenerate case. Nonlinearity 2022, 35, 3459-3486.

[223] Han, C. D. Rheology and Processing of Polymeric Materials, Volume 2: Polymer Processing, ed .; Oxford University Press: Oxford, 2006.

[224] Tanaka, H. Viscoelastic phase separation. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2000, 12, R207-R264.

[225] Geyer, S .; Piesche, M. Macro and Micro-Scale Modeling of Polyurethane Foaming Processes. AIP Conf. Proc. 2014, 1593, 560-564.

[226] Obi, B. Polymeric Foams: Structure-Property- Performance: A Design Guide, ed .; Elsevier, 2017.

[227] Heinrich, G., Kipscholl, R., Stocek, R., Eds. Fa- tigue Crack Growth in Rubber Materials, ed .; Adv. Polym. Sci .; Springer: Hoboken, 2021.

[228] Hohenberg, P. C .; Halperin, B. I. Theory of dy- namic critical phenomena. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1977, 49, 435-479.

[229] Beris, A. N. Continuum mechanics modeling of complex fluid systems following Oldroyd's seminal 1950 work. J. Non-Newtonian Fluid Mech. 2021, 298, 104677.

[230] Masmoudi, N. Global existence of weak solutions to macroscopic models of polymeric flows. J. Math. Pures et Appliquées 2011, 96, 502-520.

[231] Peterlin, A. Hydrodynamics of linear macro- molecules. J. Pure and Appl. Chem. 1966, 12, 563- 586-&.

[232] Peterlin, A. Hydrodynamics of macromolecules in a velocity field with longitudinal gradient. J. Polym. Sci. B - Pol. Lett. 1966, 4, 287-&.

[233] De Groot, S. R .; Mazur, P. Non-Equilibrium Ther- modynamics; Dover Publications: New York, 1984.

[234] Schieber, J. D .; Cordoba, A. Nonequilibrium ther- modynamics for soft matter made easy(er). Phys. Fluids 2021, 33, 083103.

[235] Öttinger, H. C. Beyond Equilibrium Thermody- namics; Wiley, 2005.

[236] Lukáčová-Medvid'ová, M .; Mizerová, H .; Nečasová, v .; Renardy, M. Global Existence Result for the Generalized Peterlin Viscoelastic Models. Siam J. Math. Anal. 2017, 49, 2950-2964.

[237] Gwiazda, P .; Lukácová-Medvid'ová, M .; Mize- rová, H .; Świerczewska Gwiazda, A. Existence of global weak solutions to the kinetic Peterlin model. Nonlinear Analysis: Real World Applica- tions 2018, 44, 465-478.

[238] Tateno, M .; Tanaka, H. Power-law coarsening in network-forming phase separation governed by me- chanical relaxation. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 912.

[239] Tanaka, H. Unusual Phase Separation in a Poly- mer Solution Caused by Asymmetric Molecular Dynamics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1993, 71, 3158-3161.

[240] Tanaka, H. Universality of Viscoelastic Phase Sep- aration in Dynamically Asymmetric Fluid Mix- tures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996, 76, 7870790.

[241] Taniguchi, T .; Onuki, A. Network Domain Struc- ture in Viscoelastic Phase Separation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996, 77, 4910-4913.

[242] Tanaka, H. Viscoelastic model of phase separation. Phys. Rev. E 1997, 56, 4451-4462.

[243] Zhou, D .; Zhang, P .; E, W. Modified models of polymer phase separation. Phys. Rev. E 2006, 73, 061801.

[244] Spiller, D .; Brunk, A .; Habrich, O .; Egger, H .; Lukáčová-Medvid'ová, M .; Dünweg, B. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2021, 33, 364001.

[245] Brunk, A .; Dünweg, B .; Egger, H .; Habrich, O .; Lukáčová-Medvid'ová, M .; Spiller, D. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2021, 33, 234002.

[246] Doi, M .; Onuki, A. Dynamic coupling between stress and composition in polymer solutions and blends. J. de Physique II 1992, 2, 1631-1656.

[247] Milner, S. T. Dynamical theory of concentra- tion fluctuations in polymer solutions under shear. Phys. Rev. E 1993, 48, 3674-3691.

[248] Brunk, A .; Lukáčová-Medvid'ová, M. Global exis- tence of weak solutions to viscoelastic phase sep- aration part: I. Regular case. Nonlinearity 2022, 35, 3417-3458.

[249] Bonomi, M .; Camilloni, C .; Cavalli, A .; Vendr- uscolo, M. Metainference: A Bayesian inference method for heterogeneous systems. Science Ad- vances 2016, 2, e1501177.

[250] Rudzinski, J. F .; Kremer, K .; Bereau, T. Com- munication: Consistent interpretation of molecu- lar simulation kinetics using Markov state models biased with external information. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 144, 051102.

[251] Frohlking, T .; Bernetti, M .; Calonaci, N .; Bussi, G. Toward empirical force fields that match exper- imental observables. J. Chem. Phys. 2020, 152, 230902.

31

[252] Miksch, A. M .; morawietz, T .; Kästner, J .; Ur- ban, A .; Artrith, N. Strategies for the construction of machine-learning potentials for accurate and ef- ficient atomic-scale simulations. Mach. Learn .: Sci. Technol. 2021, 2, 031001.

[253] Mori, H. Transport, collective motion, and Brow- nian motion. Progr. Theor. Phys. 1965, 33, 423+.

[254] Mori, H. A Continued-Fraction Representation of the Time-Correlation Functions. Progr. Theor. Phys. 1965, 34, 399-416.

[255] Zwanzig, R. Memory effects in irreversible thermo- dynamics. Phys. Rev. 1961, 124, 983-&.

[256] Forster, D. Hydrodynamic fluctuations, broken symmetry, and correlation functions, ed .; CRC press: Boca Raton, 1975.

[257] Boon, J. P .; Yip, S. Molecular hydrodynamics, ed .; Dover publications: New York, 1980.

[258] Español, P .; Lowen, H. Derivation of dynamical density functional theory using the projection op- erator technique. J. Chem. Phys. 2009, 131, 24401.

[259] Hijón, C .; Español, P .; Vanden-Eijnden, E .; Delgado-Buscalioni, R. Mori-Zwanzig formalism as a practical computational tool. Faraday Discuss. 2010, 144, 301-322.

[260] Glatzel, F .; Schilling, T. The Interplay between Memory and Potentials of Mean Force: A Dis- cussion on the Structure of Equations of Motion for Coarse-Grained Observables. EPL 2021, 136, 36001.

[261] Zwanzig, R. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics; Oxford University Press: New York, 2001.

[262] Vroylandt, H .; Monmarché, P. Position-dependent memory kernel in generalized Langevin equations: Theory and numerical estimation. J. Chem. Phys. 2022, 156, 244105.

[263] Rühle, V .; Junghans, C .; Lukyanov, A .; Kre- mer, K .; Andrienko, D. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2009, 5, 3211-3223.

[264] Lyubartsev, A. P .; Laaksonen, A. Calculation of ef- fective interaction potentials from radial distribu- tion functions: A reverse Monte Carlo approach. Phys. Rev. E 1995, 52, 3730-3737.

[265] Soper, A. K. Empirical potential Monte Carlo sim- ulation of fluid structure. Chem. Phys. 1996, 202, 295-306.

[266] Reith, D .; Pütz, M .; Müller-Plathe, F. Deriving effective mesoscale potentials from atomistic simu- lations. J. Comput. Chem. 2003, 24, 1624-1636.

[267] Ganguly, P .; Mukherji, D .; Junghans, C .; van der Vegt, N. F. A. Kirkwood-Buff Coarse-Grained Force Fields for Aqueous Solutions. J. Chem. The- ory Comput. 2012, 8, 1802-1807.

[268] de Oliveira, T. E .; Netz, P. A .; Kremer, K .; Jung- hans, C .; Mukherji, D. C-IBI: Targeting cumula- tive coordination within an iterative protocol to derive coarse-grained models of (multi-component) complex fluids. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 144, 174106.

[269] Hanke, M. Well-Posedness of the Iterative Boltz- mann Inversion. J. Stat. Phys. 2018, 170, 536-553.

[270] Ercolessi, F .; Adams, J. B. Interatomic Potentials from First-Principles Calculations: The Force-

Matching Method. EPL 1994, 26, 583-588.

[271] Izvekov, S .; Voth, G. A. A Multiscale Coarse- Graining Method for Biomolecular Systems. J. Phys. Chem. B 2005, 109, 2469-2473.

[272] Izvekov, S .; Voth, G. A. Multiscale coarse graining of liquid-state systems. J. Chem. Phys. 2005, 123, 134105.

[273] Noid, W. C .; Chu, J .- W .; Ayton, G. S .; Kr- ishna, V .; Izvekov, S .; Voth, G. A .; Andersen, H. C. The multiscale coarse-graining method. I. A rigor- ous bridge between atomistic and coarse-grained models. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 128, 244114.

[274] Noid, W. C .; Liu, P .; Wang, Y .; Chu, J .- W .; Ayton, G. S .; Izvekov, S .; Andersen, H. C .; Voth, G. A. The multiscale coarse-graining method. II. Numerical implementation for coarse- grained molecular models. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 128, 244115.

[275] Shell, M. S. The relative entropy is fundamental to multiscale and inverse thermodynamic problems. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 129, 144108.

[276] Mullinax, J. W .; Noid, W. G. Generalized Yvon- Born-Green Theory for Molecular Systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 103, 198104.[277] Mullinax, J. W .; Noid, W. G. A Generalized- Yvon-Born-Green Theory for Determining Coarse- Grained Interaction Potentials. J. Phys. Chem. C 2010, 114, 5661-5674.

[278] Wörner, S. J .; Bereau, T .; Kremer, K .; Rudzin- ski, J. F. Direct route to reproducing pair distri- bution functions with coarse-grained models via transformed atomistic cross correlations. J. Chem. Phys. 2019, 151, 244110.

[279] Wang, J .; Olsson, S .; Wehmeyer, C .; Pŕez, A .; Charron, N. E .; de Fabritiis, G .; Noe, F .; Clementi, C. Machine Learning of Coarse-Grained Molecular Dynamics Force Fields. ACS Cent. Sci. 2019, 5, 755-767.

[280] Berressem, F .; Nikoubashman, A. BoltzmaNN: Predicting effective pair potentials and equations of state using neural networks. J. Chem. Phys. 2021, 154, 124123.

[281] Mullinax, J. W .; Noid, W. G. Extended ensemble approach for deriving transferable coarse-grained potentials. J. Chem. Phys. 2009, 131, 104110.

[282] Dunn, N. J. H .; Noid, W. G. Bottom-up coarse- grained models with predictive accuracy and trans- ferability for both structural and thermodynamic properties of heptane-toluene mixtures. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 144, 204124.

[283] Rosenberger, D .; Hanke, M .; van der Vegt, N. F. A. Comparison of iterative inverse coarse-graining methods. Eur. Phys. J. - Spec. Topics 2016, 225, 1323-1345.

[284] Henderson, R. A uniqueness theorem for fluid pair correlation functions. Phys. Lett. A 1974, 99, 197- .98.

[285] Frommer, F .; Hanke, M .; Jansen, S. A note on the uniqueness result for the inverse Henderson prob- lem. J. Math. Physics 2019, 60, 093303.

32

[286] Frommer, F .; Hanke, M. A variational framework for the inverse Henderson problem of statistical mechanics. Letters in Mathematical Physics 2022, 112, 71.

[287] Ruelle, D. Statistical Mechanics: Rigorous Results; W. A. Benjamin Publ .: New York, 1969.

[288] Villa, A .; Peter, C .; van der Vegt, N. F. A. Trans- ferability of Nonbonded Interaction Potentials for Coarse-Grained Simulations: Benzene in Water. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2010, 6, 2434-2444.

[289] Delbary, F .; Hanke, M .; Ivanizki, D. A general- ized Newton iteration for computing the solution of the inverse Henderson problem. Inverse Problems in Science and Engineering 2020, 28, 1166-1190. [290] Bernhardt, M. P .; Hanke, M .; van der Vegt, N. Iterative integral equation methods for struc- tural coarse-graining. J. Chem. Phys. 2021, 154, 084118.

[291] Lebold, K. M .; Noid, W. G. Dual approach for ef- fective potentials that accurately model structure and energetics. J. Chem. Phys. 2019, 150, 234107.

[292] Lebold, K. M .; Noid, W. G. Dual-potential ap- proach for coarse-grained implicit solvent models with accurate, internally consistent energetics and predictive transferability. J. Chem. Phys. 2019, 151, 164113.

[293] Szukalo, R. J .; Noid, W. G. Investigating the en- ergetic and entropic components of effective po- tentials across a glass transition. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2021, 33, 154004.

[294] Molinero, V .; Moore, E. B. Water modeled as an intermediate element between Carbon and Silicon. J. Phys. Chem. B 2009, 113, 4008-4016.

[295] Larini, L .; Lu, L .; Voth, G. A. The multiscale coarse-graining method. VI. Implementation of three-body coarse-grained potentials. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 132, 164107.

[296] Das, A .; Andersen, H. C. The multiscale coarse- graining method. IX. A general method for con- struction of three body coarse-grained force fields. J. Chem. Phys. 2012, 136, 194114.

[297] Scherer, C .; Andrienko, D. Understanding three- body contributions to coarse-grained force-fields. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2018, 20, 22387.

[298] Glielmo, A .; Zeni, C .; De Vita, A. Efficient non- parametric n-body force fields from machine learn- ing. Phys. Rev. B 2018, 97, 184307.

[299] Allen, E. C .; Rutledge, G. C. A novel algorithm for creating coarse-grained, density dependent implicit solvent models. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 128, 154115.

[300] Moore, J. D .; Barnes, B. C .; Izvekov, S .; Lisal, M .; Sellers, M. S .; Taylor, D. E .; Brennan, J. K. A coarse-grain force field for RDX: Density depen- dent and energy conserving. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 144, 104501.

[301] Sanyal, T .; Shell, M. S. Coarse-grained models us- ing local-density potentials optimized with the rel- ative entropy: Application to implicit solvation. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 145, 034109.

[302] Sanyal, T .; Shell, M. S. Transferable Coarse- Grained Models of Liquid-Liquid Equilibrium Us-

ing Local Density Potentials Optimized with the Relative Entropy. J. Phys. Chem. A 2018, 122, 5678-5693.

[303] Dama, J. F .; Jin, J .; Voth, G. A. The Theory of Ultra-Coarse-Graining. 3. Coarse-Grained Sites with Rapid Local Equilibrium of Internal States. J. Rheol. 2017, 13, 1010-1022.

[304] Delyser, M. R .; Noid, W. G. Extended pressure- matching to inhomogeneous systems via local- density potentials. J. Chem. Phys. 2017, 147, 134111.

[305] Montes-Saralegui, M .; Kahl, G .; Nikoubash- man, A. On the applicability of density dependent effective interactions in cluster-forming systems. J. Chem. Phys. 2017, 149, 054904.

[306] Delyser, M. R .; Noid, W. G. Analysis of local den- sity potentials. J. Chem. Phys. 2017, 147, 134111.

[307] Rosenberger, D .; Sanyal, T .; Shell, M. S .; van der Vegt, N. F. A. Transferability of Local Density- Assisted Implicit Solvation Models for Homoge- neous Fluid Mixtures. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2019, 15, 2881-2895.

[308] Berressem, F .; Scherer, C .; Andrienko, D .; Nikoubashman, A. Ultra-coarse-graining of ho- mopolymers in inhomogeneous systems. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2021, 33, 254002.

[309] John, S .; Csányi, G. Many-Body Coarse-Grained Interactions Using Gaussian Approximation Po- tentials. J. Phys. Chem. B 2017, 121, 10934- 10949.

[310] Jin, J .; Voth, G. A. Ultra-Coarse-Grained Models Allow for an Accurate and Transferable Treatment of Interfacial Systems. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2018, 14, 2180-2197.

[311] Bauhl, U .; Dzubiella, J. Structure and dynamics of responsive colloids with dynamical polydipersity. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2021, 33, 174002.

[312] Cisneros, G. A .; Wikfeldt, K. T .; Ojamäe, L .; Lu, J .; Xu, Y .; Torabifard, H .; Bartok, A. P .; Csànyi, G .; Molinero, V .; Paesani, F. Modeling Molecular Interactions in Water: From Pairwise to Many-Body Potential Energy Functions. Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 7501-7528.

[313] Stillinger, F. H .; Weber, T. A. Computer simula- tion of local order in condensed phases of silicon. Phys. Rev. B 1985, 31, 5262.

[314] Stillinger, F. H .; Weber, T. A. Erratum: Computer simulation of local order in condensed phases of silicon. Phys. Rev. B 1986, 33, 1451.

[315] Scherer, C .; Scheid, R .; Andrienko, D .; Bereau, T. Kernel-Based Machine Learning for Efficient Sim- ulations of Molecular Liquids. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2020, 16, 3194-3204.

[316] Bereau, T .; Rudzinski, J. F. Accurate Structure- Based Coarse Graining Leads to Consistent Barrier-Crossing Dynamics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018, 121, 256002.

[317] Rudzinski, J. F .; Bereau, T. Coarse-grained confor- mational surface hopping: Methodology and trans- ferability. J. Chem. Phys. 2020, 153, 214110.

33

[318] Sharp, M. E .; Vazquez, F. X .; Wagner, J. W .; Dannenhoffer-Lafage, T .; Voth, G. A. Multiconfig- urational Coarse-Grained Molecular Dynamics. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2019, 15, 3306-3315.

[319] Español, P .; Revenga, M. Smoothed dissipative particle dynamics. Phys. Rev. E 2003, 67, 026705.

[320] Flory, P. J. Statistical Mechanics of Chain Molecules, ed .; Wiley: , 1969.

[321] Glaser, J .; Qin, J .; Medapuram, P .; Morse, D. C. Collective and Single-Chain Correlations in Dis- ordered Melts of Symmetric Diblock Copolymers: Quantitative Comparison of Simulations and The- ory. Macromolecules 2014, 47, 851-869.

[322] Glaser, J .; Medapuram, P .; Beardsley, T. M .; Mat- sen, M. W .; Morse, D. C. Universality of Block Copolymer Melts. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 113, 068302.

[323] Beardsley, T. M .; Matsen, M. W. Universal- ity between experiment and simulation of a di- block copolymer melt. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016, 117, 217801.

[324] Willis, J. D .; Beardsley, T. M .; Matsen, M. W. Sim- ple and Accurate Calibration of the Flory-Huggins Interaction Parameter. Macromolecules 2020, 53, 0073-9982.

[325] de Nicola, A .; Zhao, Y .; Kawakatsu, T .; Roc- catano, D .; Milano, G. Hybrid Particle-Field Coarse-Grained Models for Biological Phospho- lipids. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2011, 7, 2947- 2962.

[326] de Nicola, A .; Kawakatsu, T .; Milano, G. A Hybrid Particle-Field Coarse-Grained Molecular Model for Pluronics Water Mixtures. Macromol. Chem. Phys. 2013, 214, 1940-1950.

[327] Ledum, M .; Bore, S. L .; Cascella, M. Automated determination of hybrid particle-field parameters by machine learning. Molecular Physics 2020, 118, e1785571.[328] Sherck, N .; Shen, K .; Nguyen, M .; Yoo, B .; Kohler, S .; Speros, J. C .; Delaney, K. T .; Shell, M. S .; Fredrickson, G. H. Molecularly In- formed Field Theories from Bottom-up Coarse- Graining. ACS Macro Lett. 2021, 10, 576-583.

[329] Weyman, A .; Mavrantzas, V. G .; Öttinger, H. C. Field-theoretic simulations beyond 8-interactions: Overcoming the inverse potential problem in aux- iliary field models. J. Phys. Chem. 2021, 155, 024106.

[330] Rudzinski, J. R .; Kloth, S .; Wörner, S .; Pal, T .; Kremer, K .; Bereau, T .; Vogel, M. Dynamical properties across different coarse-grained models for ionic liquids. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2021, 33, 224001.

[331] Padding, J. T .; Louis, A. A. Hydrodynamic inter- actions and Brownian forces in colloidal systems: Coarse-graining over time and length scales. Phys. Rev. E 2006, 74, 031402.

[332] Kloth, S .; Bernhardt, M. P .; van der Vegt, N. F. A .; Vogel, M. Coarse-grained model of a nanoscale- segregated ionic liquid for simulations of low- temperature structure and dynamics. J. Phys .:

Cond. Matt. 2021, 32, 204002.

[333] Harmandaris, V. A .; Adhikari, N. P .; van der Vegt, N. F. A .; Kremer, K. Hierarchical Modeling of Polystyrene: From Atomistic to Coarse-grained Simulations. Macromolecules 2006, 39, 6708-6719. [334] Harmandaris, V. A .; Kremer, K. Dynamics of Polystyrene Melts through Hierarchical Multiscale Simulations. Macromolecules 2009, 42, 791-802.

[335] Fritz, D .; Herbers, C. R .; Kremer, K .; van der Vegt, N. F. A. Hierarchical modeling of polymer permeation. Soft Matter 2009, 5, 4556-4563.

[336] Fritz, D .; Koschke, K .; Harmandaris, V. A .; van der Vegt, N. F. A .; Kremer, K. Multiscale mod- eling of soft matter: scaling of dynamics. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2011, 13, 10412-10420.

[337] Rudzinski, J. F .; Bereau, T. Concurrent parametrization against static and kinetic in- formation leads to more robust coarse-grained force fields. Eur. Phys. J. - Spec. Topics 2016, 225, 1373-1389.

[338] Akkermans, R. L. C .; Briels, W. J. Coarse-grained dynamics of one chain in a polymer melt. J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 113, 6409-6422.

[339] Helfand, E .; Rice, S. A. Principle of correspond- ing states for transport properties. J. Chem. Phys. 1960, 32, 1642-1644.

[340] Hansen, J .- P .; McDonald, I. R. Theory of simple liquids; Academic Press: London, 1990.

[341] Rosenfeld, Y. Relation between the transport coef- ficients and the internal entropy of simple systems. Phys. Rev. A 1977, 15, 2545.

[342] Rosenfeld, Y. A quasi-universal scaling law for atomic transport in simple fluids. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 1999, 11, 5415.

[343] Rondina, G. G .; Boehm, M. C .; Müller-Plathe, F. Predicting the Mobility Increase of Coarse-Grained Polymer Models from Excess Entropy Differences. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2020, 16, 1431-1447.

[344] Lyubimov, I .; McCarty, J .; Clark, A .; Guenza, M. G. Analytical rescaling of poly-

mer dynamics from mesoscale simulations. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 132, 224903.

[345] Lyubimov, I .; Guenza, M. G. First-principle ap- proach to rescale the dynamics of simulated coarse- grained molecular liquids. Phys. Rev. E 2011, 84, 031801.

[346] Lyubimov, I .; Guenza, M. G. Theoretical recon- struction of realistic dynamics of highly coarse- grained cis-1,4-polybutadiene melts. J. Chem. Phys. 2013, 138, 12A546.

[347] Schweizer, K. S. Microscopic theory of the dynam- ics of polymeric liquids: General formulation of a mode-mode-coupling approach. J. Chem. Phys. 1989, 91, 5802.

[348] Li, Z .; Bian, X .; Caswell, B .; Karniadakis, G. E. Construction of dissipative particle dynamics mod- els for complex fluids via the Mori-Zwanzig formu- lation. Soft Matter 2014, 10, 8659-8672.

[349] Trement, S .; Schnell, B .; Petitjean, L .; Couty, M .; Rousseau, B. Conservative and dissipative force field for simulation of coarse-grained alkane

34

molecules: A bottom-up approach. J. Chem. Phys. 2014, 140, 134113.

[350] Lemarchand, C. A .; Couty, M .; Rousseau, B. Coarse-grained simulations of cis- and trans- polybutadiene: A bottom-up approach. J. Chem. Phys. 2017, 146, 074904.

[351] Deichmann, G .; van der Vegt, N. F. A. Bottom- up approach to represent dynamic properties in coarse-grained molecular simulations. J. Chem. Phys. 2018, 149, 244114.

[352] van den Noort, A .; den Otter, W. K .; Briels, W. J. Coarse graining of slow variables in dynamic sim- ulations of soft matter. EPL 2007, 80, 28003.

[353] Briels, W. J. Transient forces in flowing soft mat- ter. Soft Matter 2009, 5, 4401-4411.

[354] Liu, L .; den Otter, W. K .; Briels, W. J. Coarse grain forces in star polymer melts. Soft Matter 2014, 10, 7874-7886.

[355] Ahuja, V. R .; van der Gucht, J .; Briels, W. J. Hydrodynamically Coupled Brownian Dynamics: A coarse-grain particle-based Brownian dynam- ics technique with hydrodynamic interactions for modeling self-developing flow of polymer solutions. J. Chem. Phys. 2018, 148, 034902.

[356] Kinjo, T .; Hyodo, S. Equation of motion for coarse- grained simulation based on microscopic descrip- tion. Phys. Rev. E 2007, 75, 051109.

[357] Jung, G .; Schmid, F. Fluctuation-dissipation rela- tions far from equilibrium: a case study. Soft Mat- ter 2021, 17, 6413-6425.

[358] Straub, J. E .; Borkovec, M .; Berne, B. J. Calcula- tion of dynamic friction on intramolecular degrees of freedom. J. Phys. Chem. 1987, 91, 4995-4998.

[359] Straub, J. E .; Berne, B. J .; Roux, B. Spatial depen- dence of time-dependent friction for pair diffusion in a simple fluid. J. Chem. Phys. 1990, 93, 6804- 6812.

[360] Shin, H. K .; Kim, C .; Talkner, P .; Lee, E. K. Brownian motion from molecular dynamics. Chem. Phys. 2010, 375, 316 - 326.

[361] Carof, A .; Vuilleumier, R .; Rotenberg, B. Two al- gorithms to compute projected correlation func- tions in molecular dynamics simulations. J. Chem. Phys. 2014, 140, 124103.

[362] Lei, H .; Baker, N. A .; Li, X. Data-driven param- eterization of the generalized Langevin equation. PNAS 2016, 113, 14183-14188.

[363] Jung, G .; Hanke, M .; Schmid, F. Iterative Re- construction of Memory Kernels. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2017, 13, 2481-2488.

[364] Jung, G .; Hanke, M .; Schmid, F. Generalized Langevin dynamics: construction and numerical integration of non-Markovian particle-based mod- els. Soft Matter 2018, 14, 9368-9382.

[365] Kowalik, B .; Daldrop, J. O .; Kappler, J .; Schulz, J. C. F .; Schlaich, A .; Netz, R. R. Memory-kernel ex- traction for different molecular solutes in solvents of varying viscosity in confinement. Phys. Rev. E 2019, 100, 012126.

[366] Meyer, H .; Pelagejcev, P .; Schilling, T. Non- Markovian out-of-equilibrium dynamics: A general

numerical procedure to construct time-dependent memory kernels for coarse-grained observables. EPL 2019, 128, 40001.

[367] Meyer, H .; Wolf, S .; Stock, G .; Schilling, T. A Numerical Procedure to Evaluate Memory Effects in Non-Equilibrium Coarse-Grained Models. Adv. Theory Sim. 2021, 2000197.

[368] Wang, S .; Ma, Z .; Pan, W. Data-driven coarse- grained modeling of polymers in solution with structural and dynamic properties conserved. Soft Matter 2020, 16, 8330-8344.

[369] Bockius, N .; Shea, J .; Jung, G .; Schmid, F .; Hanke, M. Model reduction techniques for the com- putation of extended Markov parameterizations for generalized Langevin equations. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2021, 33, 214003.

[370] Klippenstein, V .; van der Vegt, N. F. A. Cross-correlation corrected friction in (general- ized) Langevin models. J. Chem. Phys. 2021, 154, 191102.

[371] Hanke, M. Mathematical analysis of some iterative methods for the reconstruction of memory kernels. ETNA - Electron. Trans. Numer. Analysis 2020, 54, 483-498.

[372] Klippenstein, V .; van der Vegt, N. F. A. Cross-correlation corrected friction in generalized Langevin models: Application to the continuous Asakura-Oosawa model. J. Chem. Phys. 2022, 157, 044103.

[373] Wang, S .; Li, Z .; Pan, W. Implicit-solvent coarse- grained modeling for polymer solutions via Mori- Zwanzig formalism. Soft Matter 2019, 15, 7567- 7582.

[374] Li, Z .; Bian, X .; Li, X .; Karniadakis, G. E. Incor- poration of memory effects in coarse-grained mod- eling via the Mori-Zwanzig formalism. J. Chem. Phys. 2015, 143, 243128.

[375] Li, Z .; Bian, X .; Yang, X .; Karniadakis, G. E. A comparative study of coarse-graining methods for polymeric fluids: Mori-Zwanzig vs. iterative Boltz- mann inversion vs. stochastic parametric optimiza- tion. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 145, 044102.

[376] Li, Z .; Lee, H. S .; Darve, E .; Karniadakis, G. E. Computing the non-Markovian coarse-grained in- teractions derived from the Mori-Zwanzig formal- ism in molecular systems: Application to polymer melts. J. Chem. Phys. 2017, 146, 014104.[377] Ferrario, M .; Grigolini, P. A generalization of the kubo-freed relaxation theory. Chemical Physics Letters 1979, 62, 100 - 106.

[378] Marchesoni, F .; Grigolini, P. On the extension of the Kramers theory of chemical relaxation to the case of nonwhite noise. J. Chem. Phys. 1983, 78, 6287-6298.

[379] Ceriotti, M .; Bussi, G .; Parrinello, M. Langevin Equation with Colored Noise for Constant- Temperature Molecular Dynamics Simulations. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 102, 020601.

[380] Ceriotti, M .; Bussi, G .; Parrinello, M. Colored- Noise Thermostats à la Carte. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2010, 6, 1170-1180.

35

[381] Baczewski, A. D .; Bond, S. D. Numerical integra- tion of the extended variable generalized Langevin equation with a positive Prony representable mem- ory kernel. J. Chem. Phys. 2013, 139, 044107.

[382] Li, B .; Daoulas, K .; Schmid, F. Dynamic coarse- graining of polymer systems using mobility func- tions. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2021, 33, 194004.

[383] Guenza, M. Many chain correlated dynamics in polymer fluids. J. Chem. Phys. 1999, 110, 7574- 7588.

[384] Padding, J. T .; Briels, W. J. Time and length scales of polymer melts studied by coarse-grained molec- ular dynamics simulations. J. Chem. Phys. 2002, 117, 925-943.

[385] Panja, D. Anomalous polymer dynamics is non- Markovian: memory effects and the generalized Langevin equation formulation. Journal of Statis- tical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2010, 2010, P06011.

[386] Hsu, H .- P .; Kremer, K. Static and dynamic proper- ties of large polymer melts in equilibrium. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 144, 154907.

[387] Semenov, A. Relaxation of long-wavelength den- sity fluctuations in a concentrated polymer solu- tion. JETP 1986, 63, 717-720.

[388] Müller, M. Memory in the relaxation of a polymer density modulation. J. Chem. Phys. 2022, 156, 124902.

[389] Müller, M .; Sollich, P .; Sun, D .- W. Nonequilib- rium Molecular Conformations in Polymer Self- Consistent Field Theory. Macromolecules 2020, 53, 10457-10474.

[390] Das, C .; Inkson, N. J .; Read, D. J .; Kelman- son, M. A .; McLeish, T. C. B. Computational linear rheology of general branch-on-branch poly- mers. J. Rheol. 2006, 50, 207.

[391] Read, D. J .; Auhl, D .; Das, C .; Den Doelder, J .; Kapnistos, M .; Vittorias, I .; McLeish, T. C. B. Linking Models of Polymerization and Dynamics to Predict Branched Polymer Structure and Flow. Science 2011, 333, 1871-1874.

[392] Bishko, G .; McLeish, T. C. B .; Harlen, O. G. Theoretical Molecular Rheology of Branched Poly- mers in Simple and Complex Flows: The Pom-Pom Model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1997, 79, 2352-2355.

[393] Zentel, K. M .; Degenkolb, J .; Busch, M. Using a Multiscale Modeling Approach to Correlate Reac- tion Conditions with Polymer Microstructure and Rheology. Macromol. Theory Sim. 2021, 2000047.

[394] Zentel, K. M .; Busch, M. Predicting Polymer Prop- erties via a Coupled Kinetic, Stochastic and Rhe- ological Modeling Approach from Reaction Condi- tions. Macr. Reaction Eng. 2022, 16, 2100027.

[395] Zentel, K. M .; Bungu, P. S. E .; Pasch, H .; Busch, M. Linking molecular structure to plant conditions: Advanced analysis of a systematic set of mini-plant scale low density polyethylenes. Polym. Chem. 2021, 12, 3026.

[396] Zentel, K. M .; Bungu, P. S. E .; Degenkolb, J .; Pasch, H .; Busch, M. Connecting the complex mi- crostructure of LDPE to its rheology and process-

ing properties via a combined fractionation and modelling approach. RSC Adv. 2021, 11, 33114.

[397] Grotian genannt Klages, H .; Ermis, N .; Luin- stra, G. A .; Zentel, K. M. Coupling Kinetic Mod- elling with SAOS and LOS Rheology of Poly(n- butyl acrylate). Macromol. Rap. Comm. 2022, 43, 2100620.

[398] Yang, Y. I .; Shao, Q .; Zhang, J .; Yang, L .; Gao, Y. Q. Enhanced sampling in molecular dy- namics. J. Chem. Phys. 2019, 151, 070902.

[399] Huber, G .; Kim, S. Weighted-ensemble Brownian dynamics simulations for protein association reac- tions. Biophys. J. 1996, 70, 97-110.

[400] Zhang, B. W .; Jasnow, D .; Zuckerman, D. M. The "weighted ensemble" path sampling method is statistically exact for a broad class of stochastic processes and binning procedures. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 132, 054107.

[401] Dellago, C .; Bolhuis, P .; Csajka, F .; Chandler, D. Transition path sampling and the calculation of rate constants. J. Chem. Phys. 1998, 108, 1964- 1977.

[402] Bolhuis, P .; Chandler, D .; Dellago, C .; Geissler, P. Transition path sampling: Throwing ropes over rough mountain passes, in the dark. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2002, 53, 291-318.

[403] Bolhuis, P. G .; Swenson, D. W. H. Transition Path Sampling as Markov Chain Monte Carlo of Trajec- tories: Recent Algorithms, Software, Applications, and Future Outlook. Adv. Theory Sim. 2021, 4, 2000237.

[404] Allen, R .; Warren, P .; ten Wolde, P. Sampling rare switching events in biochemical networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 94, 018104.

[405] Allen, R. J .; Valeriani, C .; ten Wolde, P. R. For- ward flux sampling for rare event simulations. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2009, 21, 463102.

[406] Berryman, J. T .; Schilling, T. Sampling rare events in nonequilibrium and nonstationary systems. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 133, 244101.

[407] Weinan, E .; Ren, W .; Vanden-Eijnden, E. String Method for the Study of Rare Events. Phys. Rev. B 2002, 66, 052301.

[408] Weinan, E .; Ren, W .; Vanden-Eijnden, E. Finite Temperature String Method for the Study of Rare Events. J. Phys. Chem. B 2005, 109, 6688-6693.

[409] Adelman, J. L .; Grabe, M. Simulating rare events using a weighted ensemble string-based method. J. Chem. Phys. 2013, 138, 044105.

[410] Pande, V. S .; Beauchamp, K .; Bowman, G. R. Ev- erything you wanted to know about Markov State Models but were afraid to ask. Methods 2010, 52, 99-105.

[411] Bowyman, G. R., Panday, V. S., Noé, F., Eds. An Introduction to Markov State Models and Their Application to Long Timescale Molecular Simula- tions; Advances in Experimental Medicine and Bi- ology; Springer: , 2014.

[412] Schütte, C .; Sarich, M. A critical appraisal of Markov state models. Eur. Phys. J. - Spec. Top- ics 2015, 224, 2445-2462.

36

[413] Husic, B. E .; Pande, V. S. Markov State Models: From an Art to a Science. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 2386-2396.

[414] Perez-Hernandez, G .; Paul, F .; Giorgino, T .; De Fabritiis, G .; Noe, F. Identification of slow molecular order parameters for Markov model con- struction. J. Chem. Phys. 2013, 139, 015102.

[415] Trendelkamp-Schroer, B .; Wu, H .; Paul, F .; Noe, F. Estimation and uncertainty of reversible Markov models. J. Chem. Phys. 2015, 143, 174101.

[416] Keller, B. G .; Prinz, J .- H .; Noe, F. Markov models and dynamical fingerprints: Unraveling the com- plexity of molecular kinetics. Chem. Phys. 2012, 396, 92-107.

[417] Mardt, A .; Noe, F. Progress in deep Markov state modeling: Coarse graining and experimental data restraints. J. Chem. Phys. 2021, 155, 214106.

[418] Appeldorn, J. H .; Lemcke, S .; Speck, T .; Nikoubashman, A. Employing Artificial Neural Networks to Identify Reaction Coordinates and Pathways for Self-Assembly. J. Phys. Chem. B 2022, 126, 5007-5016.

[419] Knoch, F .; Speck, T. Cycle representatives for the coarse-graining of systems driven into a non- equilibrium steady state. New J. of Physics 2015, 17, 115004.

[420] Knoch, F .; Speck, T. Nonequilibrium Markov state modeling of the globule-stretch transition. Phys. Rev. E 2017, 95, 012503.

[421] Knoch, F .; Speck, T. Non-equilibrium Markov state modeling of periodically driven biomolecules. J. Chem. Phys. 2019, 150, 054103.

[422] Knoch, F .; Speck, T. Unfolding dynamics of small peptides biased by constant mechanical forces. Mol. Syst. Design & Eng. 2018, 3, 204-213.

[423] Gemuenden, P .; Poelking, C .; Kremer, K .; Daoulas, K .; Andrienko, D. Effect of Mesoscale Ordering on the Density of States of Polymeric Semiconductors. Macromol. Rap. Comm. 2015, 36, 1047-1053.

[424] Kordt, P .; van der Holst, J. J. M .; Al Helwi, M .; Kowalsky, W .; May, F .; Badinski, A .; Lennartz, C .; Andrienko, D. Modeling of Organic Light Emitting Diodes: From Molecular to Device Properties. Adv. Funct. Mat. 2015, 25, 1955-1971.

[425] Greco, C .; Melnyk, A .; Kremer, K .; Andrienko, D .; Daoulas, K. C. Generic Model for Lamellar Self-Assembly in Conjugated Polymers: Linking Mesoscopic Morphology and Charge Transport in P3HT. Macromolecules 2019, 52, 968-981.

[426] Athanasopoulos, S .; Kirkpatrick, J .; Martinez, D .; Frost, J. M .; Foden, C. M .; Walker, A. B .; Nel- son, J. Predictive study of charge transport in disordered semiconducting polymers. Nano Lett. 2007, 7, 1785-1788.[427] Kirkpatrick, J .; Marcon, V .; Nelson, J .; Kre- mer, K .; Andrienko, D. Charge mobility of discotic mesophases: A multiscale quantum and classical study. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 98, 227402.

[428] Nelson, J .; Kwiatkowski, J. J .; Kirkpatrick, J .; Frost, J. M. Modeling Charge Transport in Organic Photovoltaic Materials. Acc. Chem. Res. 2009, 42, 1768-1778.

[429] Ruehle, V .; Lukyanov, A .; May, F .; Schrader, M .; Vehoff, T .; Kirkpatrick, J .; Baumeier, B .; An- drienko, D. Microscopic Simulations of Charge Transport in Disordered Organic Semiconductors. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2011, 7, 3335-3345.

[430] Marcus, R. A. Electron-transfer reactions in chem- istry - Theory and experiment. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1993, 65, 599-610.

[431] E, W .; Engquist, B. The Heterogeneous Multiscale Methods. Comm. Math. Sci. 2003, 1, 87-231.

[432] Ren, W .; E, W. Heterogeneous multiscale method for the modeling of complex fluids and micro- fluidics. J. Comp. Phys. 2004, 204, 1-26.

[433] E, W .; Engquist, B .; Li, X .; Ren, W .; Vanden- Eijnden, E. Heterogeneous Multiscale Methods: A Review. Comm. Comp. Phys. 2007, 2, 367-340.

[434] Borg, M. K .; Lockerby, D. A .; Reese, J. A. A mul- tiscale method for micro/nano flows of high aspect ratio. J. Comp. Phys. 2013, 233, 400-413.

[435] Stalter, S .; Yelash, L .; Emamy, N .; Statt, A .; Hanke, M .; Lukáčová-Medvid'ová, M. Molecular dynamics simulations in hybrid particle-continuum schemes: Pitfalls and caveats. Comp. Phys. Comm. 2018, 224, 198-208.

[436] Datta, R .; Yelash, L .; Schmid, F .; Kummer, F .; Oberlack, M .; Lukáčová-Medvid'ová, M .; Vir- nau, P. Shear-Thinning in Oligomer Melts - Molec- ular Origins and Applications. Polymers 2021, 13, 2806.

[437] Tedeschi, F .; Giusteri, G. G .; Yelash, L .; Lukáčová- Medvid'ová, M. A multi-scale method for complex flows of non-Newtonian fluids. Math. in Engineer- ing 2021, 4, 1-22.

[438] Honda, T .; Kawakatsu, T. Hybrid Dynamic Den- sity Functional Theory for Polymer Melts and Blends. Macromolecules 2007, 40, 1227-1237.

[439] Müller, M .; Daoulas, K. C. Speeding Up Intrin- sically Slow Collective Processes in Particle Sim- ulations by Concurrent Coupling to a Continuum Description. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2011, 107, 227801.

[440] Warshel, A .; Levitt, M. Theoretical studies of enzy- matic reactions: Dielectric, electrostatic and steric stabilization of the carbonium ion in the reaction of lysozyme. J. Mol. Biol. 1976, 103, 227-280.

[441] Praprotnik, M .; Delle Site, L .; Kremer, K. Adaptive resolution molecular-dynamics simula- tion: Changing the degrees of freedom on the fly. J. Chem. Phys. 2005, 123, 224106.

[442] De Fabritiis, G .; Delgado-Buscalioni, R .; Coveney, P. V. Multiscale Modeling of Liq- uids with Molecular Specificity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 97, 134501.

[443] Neri, M .; Anselmi, C .; Cascella, M .; Maritan, A .; Carloni, P. Coarse-Grained Model of Proteins In- corporating Atomistic Detail of the Active Site. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 95, 218102.

37

[444] Potestio, R .; Fritsch, S .; Español, P .; Delgado- Buscalioni, R .; Kremer, K .; Everaers, R .; Dona- dio, D. Hamiltonian Adaptive Resolution Simula- tion for Molecular Liquids. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 110, 108301.

[445] Delgado-Buscalioni, R .; De Fabritiis, G. Embed- ding Molecular Dynamics within Fluctuating Hy- drodynamics in Multiscale Simulations of Liquids. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 76, 036709.

[446] Ensing, B .; Nielsen, S. O .; Moore, P. B .; Klein, M. L .; Parrinello, M. Energy Conserva- tion in Adaptive Hybrid Atomistic/Coarse-Grain Molecular Dynamics. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2007, 3, 1100-1105.

[447] Oestereich, M .; Gauss, J .; Diezemann, G. Force probe simulations using an adaptive resolution scheme. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2021, 33, 194005.

[448] Delgado-Buscalioni, R .; Kremer, K .; Praprot- nik, M. Concurrent triple-scale simulation of molecular liquids. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 128, 114110.

[449] Delgado-Buscalioni, R .; Kremer, K .; Praprot- nik, M. Coupling atomistic and continuum hydro- dynamics through a mesoscopic model: Applica- tion to liquid water. J. Chem. Phys. 2009, 131, 244107.

[450] Qi, S .; Behringer, H .; Schmid, F. Using field theory to construct hybrid particle-continuum simulation schemes with adaptive resolution for soft matter systems. New J. of Physics 2013, 15, 125009.

[451] Qi, S .; Behringer, H .; Raasch, T .; Schmid, F. A hy- brid particle-continuum resolution method and its application to a homopolymer solution. Eur. Phys. J. - Spec. Topics 2016, 225, 1527-1549.

[452] Qi, S .; Schmid, F. Hybrid particle-continuum sim- ulations coupling Brownian dynamics and local dy- namic density functional theory. Soft Matter 2017, 13, 7938-7947.

[453] Abrams, C. F. Concurrent dual-resolution Monte Carlo simulation of liquid methane. J. Chem. Phys. 2005, 123, 234101.

[454] Heidari, M .; Kremer, K .; Cortes-Huerto, R .; Potes- tio, R. Spatially Resolved Thermodynamic Integra- tion: An Efficient Method To Compute Chemical Potentials of Dense Fluids. J. Chem. Theory Com- put. 2018, 14, 3409-3417.

[455] Heidari, M .; Kremer, K .; Golestanian, R .; Potes- tio, R .; Cortes-Huerto, R. Open-boundary Hamil- tonian adaptive resolution. From grand canoni- cal to non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simu- lations. J. Chem. Phys. 2020, 152, 194104.

[456] Baptista, L. A .; Dutta, R. C .; Sevilla, M .; Hei- dari, M .; Potestio, R .; Kremer, K .; Cortes- Huerto, R. Density-functional-theory approach to the Hamiltonian adaptive resolution simulation method. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2021, 33, 184003.

[457] Stieffenhofer, M .; Wand, M .; Bereau, T. Adver- sarial reverse mapping of equilibrated condensed- phase molecular structures. Machine Learning - Science and Technology 2020, 1, 045014.

[458] Stieffenhofer, M .; Bereau, T .; Wand, M. Adversar- ial reverse mapping of condensed-phase molecular structures: Chemical transferability. APL Materi- als 2021, 9, 031107.

[459] Santangelo, G .; Di Matteo, A .; Müller-Plathe, F .; Milano, G. From mesoscale back to atomistic mod- els: A fast reverse-mapping procedure for vinyl polymer chains. J. Phys. Chem. B 2007, 111, 2765-2773.

[460] Rzepiela, A. J .; Schäfer, L. V .; Goga, N .; Risse- lada, H. J .; de Vries, A. H .; Marrink, S. J. Recon- struction of atomistic details from coarse-grained structures. J. Comput. Chem. 2010, 31, 1333- 1343.

[461] Lombardi, L. E .; Marti, M. A .; Capece, L. CG2AA: backmapping protein coarse-grained structures. Bioinformatics 2016, 32, 1235-1237.

[462] Liu, P .; Shi, Q .; Lyman, E .; Voth, G. A. Recon- structing atomistic detail for coarse-grained mod- els with resolution exchange. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 129, 114103.

[463] Kmiecik, S .; Gront, D .; Kolinski, M .; Wieteska, L .; Dawid, A. E .; Kolinski, A. Coarse-Grained Protein Models and Their Applications. Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 7898-7936.

[464] Li, W .; Burkhart, C .; Polinska, P .; Harman- daris, V .; Doxastakis, M. Backmapping coarse- grained macromolecules: An efficient and versatile machine learning approach. J. Chem. Phys. 2020, 153, 041101.

[465] Svaneborg, C .; Karimi-Varzaneh, H. A .; Ho- jdis, N .; Fleck, F .; Everaers, R. Multiscale ap- proach to equilibrating model polymer melts. Phys. Rev. E 2016, 94, 032502.

[466] Auhl, R .; Everaers, R .; Grest, G. G .; Kremer, K .; Plimpton, S. J. Equilibration of long chain poly- mer melts in computer simulations. J. Chem. Phys. 2003, 119, 12718.

[467] Moreira, L. A .; Zhang, G .; Müller, F .; Stuehn, T .; Kremer, K. Direct Equilibration and Characteriza- tion of Polymer Melts for Computer Simulations. Macromol. Theory Sim. 2015, 24, 419-431.

[468] Ozog, D .; McCarty, J .; Gossett, G .; Malony, A. D .; Guenza, M. Fast equilibration of coarse-grained polymeric liquids. J. Comp. Sci. 2015, 9, 33-38.

[469] Sliozberg, Y. R .; Kroger, M .; Chantawansri, T. L. Fast equilibration protocol for million atom sys- tems of highly entangled linear polyethylene chains. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 144, 154901.

[470] Subramanian, G. A topology preserving method for generating equilibrated polymer melts in com- puter simulations. J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 133, 164902.

[471] Subramanian, G. An Iterative Method for Produc- ing Equilibrated Symmetric Three-Arm Star Poly- mer Melts in Molecular Dynamics. Macromol. The- ory Sim. 2011, 20, 46-53.

[472] de Nicola, A .; Kawakatsu, T .; Milano, G. Gener- ation of Well-Relaxed All-Atom Models of Large Molecular Weight Polymer Melts: A Hybrid Particle-Continuum Approach Based on Particle-

38Field Molecular Dynamics Simulations. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2014, 10, 5651-5667.

[473] de Nicola, A .; Munaó, G .; Grizzuti, N .; Au- riemma, F .; De Rosa, C .; Sevink, A .; Milano, G. Generation of well-relaxed all atom models of stere- oregular polymers: A validation of hybrid particle- field molecular dynamics for polypropylene melts of different tacticities. Soft Materials 2020, 18, 228-241.

[474] Zhang, G .; Moreira, L. A .; Stuehn, T .; Daoulas, K. C .; Kremer, K. Equilibration of High Molecular Weight Polymer Melts: A Hi- erarchical Strategy. ACS Macro Lett. 2014, 3, 198-203.

[475] Zhang, G .; Stuehn, T .; Daoulas, K. C .; Kremer, K. Communication: One size fits all: Equilibrating chemically different polymer liquids through uni- versal long-wavelength description. J. Chem. Phys. 2015, 142, 221102.

[476] Ohkuma, T .; Kremer, K .; Daoulas, K. Equilibrat- ing high-molecular-weight symmetric and miscible polymer blends with hierarchical back-mapping. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2018, 30, 174001.

[477] Zhang, G .; Chazirakis, A .; Harmandaris, V. A .; Stuehn, T .; Daoulas, K. C .; Kremer, K. Hierarchi- cal modelling of polystyrene melts: from soft blobs to atomistic resolution. Soft Matter 2019, 15, 289- 302.

[478] Meyer, H .; Horwath, E .; Virnau, P. Mapping onto Ideal Chains Overestimates Self-Entanglements in Polymer Melts. ACS Macro Lett. 2018, 7, 757-761. [479] Tubiana, L .; Kobayashi, H .; Potestio, R .; Dünweg, B .; Kremer, K .; Virnau, P .; Daoulas, K. Comparing equilibration schemes of high- molecular-weight polymer melts with topological indicators. J. Phys .: Cond. Matt. 2021, 33, 204003.

[480] Bozkurt Varolguenes, Y .; Bereau, T .; Rudzin- ski, J. F. Interpretable embeddings from molecular simulations using Gaussian mixture variational au- toencoders. Machine Learning - Science and Tech- nology 2020, 1, 015012.

[481] Unke, O. T .; Chmiela, S .; Sauceda, H. E .; Gastegger, M .; Poltavsky, I .; Schütt, K. T .; Tkatchenko, A. Machine Learning Force Fields. Chem. Rev. 2021, 121, 10142-10186.

[482] Bereau, T .; Andrienko, D .; von Lilienfeld, O. A. Transferable Atomic Multipole Machine Learning Models for Small Organic Molecules. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2015, 11, 3225-3233.

[483] Webb, M. A .; Jackson, N. E .; Gil, P. S .; de Pablo, J. Targeted sequence design within the coarse-grained polymer genome. Sci. Adv. 2020, 6, eabc6216.

[484] Hoffmann, C .; Menichetti, R .; Kanekal, K. H .; Bereau, T. Controlled exploration of chemical space by machine learning of coarse-grained rep- resentations. Phys. Rev. E 2019, 100, 033302.

[485] Zhang, Z .; Friedrich, K. Artificial neural networks applied to polymer composites: a review. Comp. Sci. and Technology 2003, 63, 2029-2044.

[486] Rong, Q .; Wei, H .; Huang, X .; Bao, H. Predict- ing the effective thermal conductivity of compos- ites from cross sections images using deep learn- ing methods. Comp. Sci. Technology 2019, 184, 107861.

[487] Liu, B .; Vu-Bac, N .; Rabczuk, T. A stochastic mul- tiscale method for the prediction of the thermal conductivity of Polymer nanocomposites through hybrid machine learning algorithms. Composite Structures 2021, 273, 114269.

[488] Garcia-Carrillo, M .; Espinoza-Martinez, A. B .; Ramos-de Valle, L. F .; Sanchez-Valdes, S. Simulta- neous optimization of thermal and electrical con- ductivity of high density polyethylene-carbon par- ticle composites by artificial neural networks and multi-objective genetic algorithm. Comp. Mat. Sci- ence 2022, 201, 110956.

[489] Tu, K .- H .; Huang, H .; Lee, S .; Lee, W .; Sun, Z .; Alexander-Katz, A .; Ross, C. A. Machine Learn- ing Predictions of Block Copolymer Self-Assembly. Adv. Mat. 2020, 32, 2005713.

[490] Mattioni, B .; Jurs, P. Prediction of glass transi- tion temperatures from monomer and repeat unit structure using computational neural networks. J. Chem. Inf. and Comp. Sci. 2002, 42, 232-240.

[491] Ning, L. Artificial neural network prediction of glass transition temperature of fluorine-containing polybenzoxazoles. J. Mat. Sci. 2009, 44, 3156- 3164.

[492] Liu, W. Prediction of Glass Transition Tempera- tures of Aromatic Heterocyclic Polyimides Using an ANN Model. Polymer Engineering and Science 2010, 50, 1547-1557.

[493] Liu, Y .; Tan, Z .; Zhang, S. Prediction of Glass Transition Temperatures of Polyquinolines and Polyquinoxalines. Pol. Sci. A 2012, 54, 48-60.

[494] Liu, W .; Cao, C. Artificial neural network predic- tion of glass transition temperature of polymers. Coll. Polym. Sci. 2009, 287, 811-818.

[495] Palomba, D .; Esteban G .;

Vazquez, Fa- tima Diaz, M. Novel descriptors from main and side chains of high-molecular-weight poly- mers applied to prediction of glass transition temperatures. J. Mol. Graph. & Model. 2012, 38, 137-147.

[496] Higuchi, C .; Horvath, D .; Marcou, Prediction G .; Yoshizawa, K .; Varnek, A of the Glass-Transition Temperatures of Linear Homo/Heteropolymers and Cross-Linked Epoxy Resins. ACS Appl. Polym. Mat. 2019, 1, 1430- 1442.

[497] Pilania, G .; Iverson, C. N .; Lookman, T .; Mar- rone, B. L. Machine-Learning-Based Predictive Modeling of Glass Transition Temperatures: A Case of Polyhydroxyalkanoate Homopolymers and Copolymers. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2019, 59, 5013- 5025.

[498] Miccio, L. A .; Schwartz, G. A. Localizing and quantifying the intra-monomer contributions to the glass transition temperature using artificial neural networks. Polymer 2020, 203, 122786.

39

[499] Miccio, L. A .; Schwartz, G. A. From chemical structure to quantitative polymer properties pre- diction through convolutional neural networks. Polymer 2020, 193, 122341.

[500] Wen, C .; Liu, B .; Wolfgang, J .; Long, T. E .; Odle, R .; Cheng, S. Determination of glass tran- sition temperature of polyimides from atomistic molecular dynamics simulations and machine- learning algorithms. J. Polym. Sci. 2020, 58, 1521-1534.

[501] Tao, L .; Varshney, V .; Li, Y. Benchmarking Ma- chine Learning Models for Polymer Informatics: An Example of Glass Transition Temperature. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2021, 61, 5395-5413.

[502] Karuth, A .; Alesadi, A .; Xia, W .; Rasulev, B. Pre- dicting glass transition of amorphous polymers by application of cheminformatics and molecular dy- namics simulations. Polymer 2021, 218, 123495.

[503] Chen, G .; Tao, L .; Li, Y. Predicting Polymers' Glass Transition Temperature by a Chemical Lan- guage Processing Model. Polymers 2021, 13, 1898.

[504] Zhang, Y .; Xu, X. Machine learning glass transi- tion temperature of polyacrylamides using quan- tum chemical descriptors. Polymer Chemistry 2021, 12, 843-851.

[505] Tao, L .; Chen, G .; Li, Y. Machine learning discov- ery of high-temperature polymers. Patterns 2021, 2, 100225.

[506] Audus, D. J .; de Pablo, J. J. Polymer Informatics: Opportunities and Challenges. ACS Macro Lett. 2017, 6, 1078-1082.

[507] Bereau, T. Compuational compound screening of biomolecules and soft materials by molecular sim- ulations. Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2021, 29, 023001.

[508] Gormley, A. J .; Webb, M. A. Machine learning in combinatorial polymer chemistry. Nature Reviews Materials 2021, 6, 642-644.

[509] Jablonka, K. M .; Jothiappan, G. M .; Wang, S .; Smit, B .; Yoo, B. Bias free multiobjective active learning for materials design and discovery. Nature Communications 2021, 12, 2312.

[510] Kim, C .; Chandrasekaran, A .; Huan, T. D .; Das, D .; Ramprasad, R. Polymer Genome: A Data-Powered Polymer Informatics Platform for Property Predictions. J. Phys. Chem. C 2018, 122, 17575-17585.

[511] Tran, H. D .; Kim, C .; Chen, L .; Chan- drasekaran, A .; Batra, R .; Venkatram, S .; Ka- mal, D .; Lightstone, J. P .; Gurnani, R .; Shetty, P .; Ramprasad, M .; Laws, J .; Shelton, M .; Ram- prasad, R. Machine-learning predictions of poly- mer properties with Polymer Genome. J. Appl. Phys. 2020, 128, 171104.

[512] Ma, R .; Liu, Z .; Zhang, Q .; Liu, Z .; Luo, T. Eval- uating Polymer Representations via Quantifying Structure-Property Relationships. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2019, 59, 3110-3119.

[513] Jangizehi, A .; Schmid, F .; Besenius, P .; Kre- mer, K .; Seiffert, S. Defects and Defect Engineering in Soft Matter. Soft Matter 2022, 972, 10809.

[514] Vakis, A. I. et al. Modeling and simulation in tri- bology across scales: An overview. Tribology Inter- national 2018, 125, 169-199. [515] Krauklis, A. E .; Karl, C. W .; Rocha, U. B. C. M .; Burlakovs, J .; Ozola-Davidane, R .; Gagni, A. I .; Starkova, O. Modelling of environmental Ageing

40

of Polymers and Polymer Composities - Modular and Multiscale Methods. Polymers 2022, 14, 216.

[516] Starkova, O .; Gagani, A. I .; Karl, C. W .; Rocha, I. B. C. M .; Burlakovs, J .; Kraklis, A. E. Modelling of environmental Ageing of Polymers and Poly- mer Composities - Durability Prediction Methods. Polymers 2022, 14, 907.