# Chemical Potential of a Flexible Polymer Liquid in a Coarse-Grained Representation

## I. INTRODUCTION



reference state, typically the gas phase. While determin- ing the free energy of a system in its gas phase is not problematic, the challenging part lies is calculating the contribution of the excess chemical potential to the free energy.

To gain a comprehensive understanding of the thermo- dynamic stability of polymer melts, it is crucial to pre- cisely determine their phase diagram by calculating their chemical potential.1 Nevertheless, conducting an experi- mental investigation to determine the phase diagram of polymer chain melts is often unattainable due to the crit- ical temperature of the polymer melt typically exceeding its degradation temperature. In essence, the polymer degrades before its coexistence curve can be measured. In response, computational modeling has emerged as a solution to determine polymer coexistence curves, effec- tively circumventing the challenges posed by experimen- tal phase diagram determination.2 The isothermal coex- istence of two phases is defined by equal pressure and equal chemical potential in the two phases (Pp(1) = Pp(2) and up(1) = Hp(2)), making accurate numerical calcula- tions of pressure and chemical potential indispensable. Nonetheless, this task can prove to be non-trivial.

The theoretical framework for calculating the excess chemical potential as an energy difference was first devel- oped by Ben Widom. In Widom's method, the chemical potential is computed by measuring the difference in in- ternal energy when inserting a 'ghost' molecule into the gas or liquid matrix.2-4 This method is computationally straightforward and easily implemented in Monte Carlo (MC) simulations of liquids. However, the one-step inser- tion of the molecule becomes impractical when inserting a sizable molecule, such as a polymer, into a dense liquid, as it is unlikely to be accepted.

Throughout the years, various sophisticated compu- tational techniques have been developed to enhance the insertion probability of polymer chains into a dense ma- trix. Among these techniques, the configurational-bias Monte Carlo (CBMC) method by Siepmann and cowork- ers has been the most effective.5 In the CBMC method, a polymer chain is gradually inserted into the polymer matrix, one monomer at a time. After placing the first monomer inside the matrix at a random location, the sec- ond monomer is inserted by seeking an unoccupied site within a spatial region surrounding the first monomer. This process is repeated until the entire chain is in-

Calculating pressure from the simulation trajectory us- ing the virial equation is straightforward, but determin- ing the chemical potential can be challenging. The chem- ical potential, being a free energy, is calculated as an excess quantity by taking the difference from a known

a) Electronic mail: mguenza@uoregon.edu

serted. The CBMC method allows the direct calculation of the excess chemical potential from the chain inser- tion probability, following Rosenbluth statistics.6 Orig- inally developed for a polymer matrix on a lattice, the chain insertion method has been extended to a continuum by de Pablo and coworkers,7 and to extensible chains by Mooij and Frenkel.8 In contrast to Widom's sim- ple direct insertion of the entire molecule in one step,4 the CBMC method offers a higher probability of suc- cessfully inserting the polymer chain. However, as the chain length increases, finding an available site becomes progressively more challenging.9 Consequently, polymers with more than 30 monomers can hardly be inserted into dense polymer melts, leading to limitations in determin- ing the chemical potential for long polymer chains. For instance, Siepmann and colleagues investigated the vapor liquid coexistence curves in samples featuring degrees of polymerization up to N = 16 for both n-alkanes and perfluorinated alkanes. 10,11 More recently, their research extended to examining head-to-head polypropylene up to N = 36 monomers, as well as polypropylene with the same monomer count, alongside poly (ethylene-alt- propylene) consisting of N = 30 monomers.12

To enhance the capabilities of MC configurational sampling by chain insertion, several alternative meth- ods have been proposed, including the pruned-enriched Rosenbluth method, 13 and the incremental gauge cell method.14 Building upon the CBMC method, Kumar and coworkers focused on solving the incremental chem- ical potential, which represents the increase in excess chemical potential with the addition of a single monomer segment. The intramolecular chemical potential of the full chain is thus calculated segment by segment. No- tably, this potential becomes independent of chain length for chains longer than ten segments. Note that the in- cremental chemical potential was reported for dilute so- lutions of chains with up to 30 monomers, thus for lower densities and shorter chains than those considered in our study.15,16

An expanded ensemble method was proposed by Wild- ing and Müller, in which a chain is introduced as a "permanent penetrable chain" that is gradually coupled to or decoupled from the matrix by tuning an interac- tion parameter.17 In their 'expanded ensemble simula- tion' polymers were modeled on a lattice using the bond fluctuation model. For an athermal polymer system, they simulated chains with length up to N = 80 at a volume fraction of 0.4, significantly lower than the melt density considered in this study. Additionally, they conducted simulations of thermal polymer chains with degrees of polymerization up to N = 40 at a volume fraction of 0.2. Later, Escobedo and de Pablo introduced the EVA- LENCH method, which combines elements of Müller's expanded ensemble, Kumar's chain increment, and Siep- mann's continuum configurational-bias method. This ap- proach was applied to calculate the chemical potential for tangent hard spheres with 4, 8, 16, and 32 monomers at low densities, and the results aligned with those previ- ously reported by other methods. 18

2

A number of other sophisticated schemes were pro- posed by Theodorou and coworkers to extend particle deletion methods, 19-21 where the excess chemical po- tential was decomposed into an energetic contribution and a volume term related to cavity formation. In the staged particle deletion method, the excess chemical po- tential was calculated through a combination of insertion and deletion moves, chain breaking and rebuilding, and more. Using the particle deletion method together with the connectivity-altering end-bridging Monte Carlo move to make an equilibrated matrix, Theodorou and cowork- ers investigated the infinite dilution solubility of benzene in a matrix of polyethylene chains with degree of poly- merization N = 44.22 The phase diagram of long chains with N = 2048 monomers in semi-dilute solution was calculated with the pruned-enriched Rosenbluth method for polymer chains modeled as self-avoiding walks with attractive energy between each pair of neighboring non- bonded monomers on a simple cubic lattice with helical boundary conditions.23

A common observation from these studies is that they involve polymeric systems at low density, or in solution.23 Computational investigations involving realistic polymer structures with all-atom or United Atom (UA) resolu- tions at high density remain computationally intractable when the chain length exceeds 30 monomers.12 This ab- sence of computational research addressing the phase di- agram of high-density liquids containing long polymer chains underscores the challenges associated with mea- suring converging excess free energies for these systems using insertion methods.

An alternative computational method to Widom inser- tion is thermodynamic integration, where the free energy is calculated by integrating the pressure along a trajec- tory of increasing density.2 Nevertheless, this approach remains computationally demanding for polymeric liq- uids, because it is sensitive to the chosen integration path, and its accuracy hinges on factors such as sampling frequency, integration point placement, and the preci- sion of the initial integration state. In the presence of a phase transition, thermodynamic integration becomes impractical due to the challenge of defining a reliable in- tegration path that captures necessary ensemble averages while transitioning between phases.2

Some methods rely on determining the equation of state (EOS) from which the chemical potential can be cal- culated using standard thermodynamic relations.24 For instance, methods have been developed using a pertur- bative expansion around the hard-sphere EOS. However, such a procedure becomes challenging for complex sys- tems because it requires a significant number of ad- justable parameters to fit for accuracy.22,25 Thus, the Widom method could still be the most promising strat- egy to solve this problem.

Another theoretical method is self-consistent field the- ory. This is a continuum approach that effectively pre- dicts phase diagrams of complex polymeric systems in the limit of high molecular weight chains (N > 00) and high-density liquids. In this context, fluctuations

are suppressed, and the specific monomeric structure of the sample becomes less significant. Field-theoretical cal- culations rely on phenomenological interaction parame- ters and do not directly connect to the atomistic pic- ture. Compared with mean-field and continuum theories, particle-based methods hold an advantage by directly connecting to the local structural information while in- corporating fluctuations. 26

Our proposed approach combines Widom's one-step, one-molecule insertion technique with a coarse-grained (CG) representation of polymer liquids based on the Inte- gral Equation theory of Coarse-Graining (IECG).27 The IECG method is an extension of polymer Reference In- teraction Site Model (polymer RISM or PRISM) theory, which is itself an extension of atomic Ornstein-Zernike (OZ) integral equation theory.28 Notably, the soft po- tential inherent to the IECG method addresses the chal- lenges associated with insertion, particularly for longer polymer chains where the interpolymer potential of IECG becomes softer. This results in the efficient acceptance of most chain insertions during Monte Carlo simulations, facilitating the straightforward computation of the excess chemical potential.

To calculate the excess chemical potential using the IECG approach, we integrated our CG potential into an open source software package called Monte Carlo for Complex Chemical Systems (MCCCS), 5,29 created and maintained by the Siepmann group, that implements a CBMC algorithm within the Gibbs ensemble Monte Carlo (GEMC) simulation method.30 This modified code, referred to herein as "MCCCS-CG", allowed direct cal- culation of the chemical potential for polymer liquids at atomistic resolutions using the CBMC approach and was then extended to evaluate the excess chemical potential of CG polymer chains across various state points for a range of polymer liquids at high densities. These ther- modynamic conditions ensured the stability of the liquid phase without spontaneous phase transitions.

To validate the accuracy of our proposed method, we undertook two distinct procedures. Initially, we assessed the robustness of the IECG description within MC simu- lations by comparing the structural and thermodynamic attributes of equilibrated polymer liquids with corre- sponding atomistic Molecular Dynamics (MD) simula- tions under the same thermodynamic conditions. This step established the faithful reproduction of structural features, such as pair distribution functions, and ther- modynamic aspects like pressure, confirming the fidelity of the MCCCS-CG code in emulating the properties of atomistic MD simulations.

As a secondary test, we evaluated the MCCCS-CG simulation data for the excess chemical potential by com- paring them to theoretical predictions for the same quan- tity. The IECG method provided a theoretical expres- sion amenable to numerical solution across any thermo- dynamic state point, and an analytical solution valid, at the very least, in the high-density liquid limit. In this way, we confirmed the consistency of the IECG ap- proach in calculating the excess chemical potential for

3

high-density polymer liquids. The success of these tests indicates that the proposed method could be employed to predict phase diagrams of polymer melts with long chains because it provides a reliable evaluation of the ex- cess chemical potential in the high-density regime, where insertion methods using atomistic polymer resolution do not perform well.

Importantly, we examined the consistency of the chem- ical potential for various levels of CG, meaning the rep- resentation of polymer chains as different numbers of CG units, denoted as nb. We demonstrated that the ex- cess chemical potential is invariant for practical values of np. We stress though that while both the IECG the- ory and simulation provide values for the excess chemical potential, only the CG simulation is able to provide the molecular details necessary for obtaining atomistic con- figuration data through backmapping, if desired. Lastly, we emphasize the significant computational efficiency of our approach, which is orders of magnitude faster than atomistic simulations. In this study, we computed the excess chemical potential for high-density polyethylene melts encompassing degrees of polymerization ranging from N = 44 to N = 720. The agreement between the- oretical predictions and simulations consistently proved to be satisfactory across all sample cases.

The remainder of this manuscript is structured as fol- lows. We first describe our model system and derive an exact statistical mechanical expression for the chemical potential following the Widom approach. Then, we dis- cuss the details of the intramolecular and intermolecular energies used in the expression for the chemical potential, including their connection to the IECG theory. We then summarize the IECG method of determining elements in these energies by fitting a few parameters to short-time atomistic simulation data. Following this, we derive sim- ple forms for the excess chemical potential that depend only on functions already established in the IECG the- ory. Subsequently, we discuss the ingredients of the asso- ciated CG simulation and how it extends prior simulation codes. We then present and compare the results obtained from the IECG theory and simulation. Lastly, we pro- vide a summary of the work and discuss limitations and advatages of the IECG approach.

## II. THEORY



## A. Model system and formal expressions for the chemical potential



Consider a liquid of n polymers in a volume V and at a temperature T. Each polymer has a degree of poly- merization N, partitioned into a variable number of CG units or blobs, nb, where each unit contains a number Nb = N/nb of monomers. The chain number density is then Pch = n/V, the monomer density is p = PchN, and the density of CG units is pb = p/Nb.

To calculate the chemical potential we follow Widom's insertion method, where we measure the change in

Helmholtz free energy (F) when we "virtually" add one polymer chain, identical to the other chains, to the liquid in the canonical ensemble (constant n, V and T). When this ghost polymer is inserted into a matrix of n - 1 host polymers, the change in free energy is the blob-blob chemical potential (ubb)

4 b = = - kBT In Q(n-1)nb Qnno

On V.T

, (1)

where kB is Boltzmann's constant, and Qnny denotes the canonical partition function of a liquid of n CG chains, each containing no blobs,

Qnny

A3nnon! Zbl .

(2)

Here, Zbb is the blob-blob configurational integral, and A = (2T Bh2 /mb)1/2 is the mean thermal de Broglie wave- length of the blob, where mb is the mass of a blob, h is Planck's constant divided by 2T, and 6 = 1/(kBT).

The configurational integral in turn is

Zho =| DRn exp [-β(Uintra (Rn) + Uinter (Rn))] , (3)

where Rn = {r11, .. . , rinb> . . . , In1, .. . , Innb } denotes a configuration of the CG site positions of the n chains, with rig the position of site a on polymer i. As such, f DRn = f Iii Hat1 dria denotes an integra- tion over the entire space of site positions. Uintra (Rn) and Ubb inter (Rn) are the total intramolecular and the in- termolecular internal energies of the n-chain liquid, re- spectively, in the configuration Rn.

Incorporating Eqs.(2) and (3) into Eq.(1) yields

pob = uid + pexc. „bb bb

(4)

Here, ulo is the chemical potential needed to insert one chain into an ideal gas of identical chains, and is given by

.bb Mid

A3nbn

(5) -kBT In Zb ,

while pexc, the excess chemical potential, accounts for the intermolecular interactions between the single inserted chain and the other polymer chains in the liquid, and the change of conformation of the single chain when it is inserted into the liquid, given by

Note that Zbb is the configurational integral over the co- ordinates of a single isolated polymer chain in the volume V. An approximation to Eq.(6) will be derived below.

4

## B. Intramolecular and Intermolecular internal energies in the IECG theory



To determine the partition function of a polymer liq- uid in a CG representation, Zbb, given by Eq.(3), ex- pressions for the intramolecular and intermolecular ener- gies, Uintra (Rn) and Uhter (Rn), respectively, are needed. To that end, we utilize the integral equation theory of CG (IECG). The IECG formalism is based upon the polymer reference interaction site model (polymer- RISM or PRISM) theory31, which itself is a generaliza- tion of atomic Ornstein-Zernike (OZ) theory32 to macro- molecules.

In the IECG theory, the chain is typically modeled with only a few blobs, so that for long flexible chains with Nb >> 1, the correlations between blobs can be modeled as Gaussian. The average square end-to-end distance at melt densities is then (R2) = (nb - 1)12, where l is the average distance (bond length) between CG units.

If long-range interactions within a chain can be ig- nored, say, due to inter-chain screening at melt densities, then at the simplest level the chain structure is ideal. In this case, the intramolecular potential, Uotra intra (Rn), can be represented as a sum of Edwards Hamiltonians33

n nb-1

Uba(Rn) = kBT > > i=1 Q=1 3 5 (Via/1)2, (7)

where lia = |ri,a - ri,a+1| is the distance between neigh- boring CG sites, a and a + 1, on chain i. Using this in Eq.(3), the single molecule partition function, Zbb can be calculated analytically to be

Zbb = V (2x12 /3) 3/2(no-1) .

(8)

This expression depends on temperature only weakly through the bond length l, which also depends upon nb since (R2) is invariant.

In general though, long-range interactions cannot be ignored as they change the chain structure from ideal to self-avoiding at low (or zero) density, which is the regime in which Zbb is computed. The IECG theory then uses a more sophisticated form for Uintra (Rn), which we state below. For a detailed description of these expressions, and also those for Uber (Rn), please refer to our previ- ously published papers.

The IECG form for Ubb intra (Rn) contains contributions from bond, angle, and non-bonded long-range interac- tions. The dihedral contribution is not relevant in this case because the CG sites are soft and can overlap. So,

UT.bb

intra

TT.bb Ubond + Ubb angle nb

+ Ubb (9) The intramolecular bond energy bb Pexc = - kBT In (6) Zbb Zbb n nb-1 -(n-1) Zbb .

bond = Ed + EL Urep (lia), 2,bb

(10)

i=1 a=1

where the first term is given by Eq.(7) above, and the pair potential, vpop (r), provides a short-range repulsion between nearest neighbor blobs. It will be defined below.

The intramolecular angle energy is defined as

n nb-2

Ţbb angle

= - kBT >> In[P(¿) / sin (0;}]

(11)

i=1 }=1

where 0ig is the bond angle between the sites §, § + 1 and § + 2. the angular probability distribution is given for a chain following a random walk as

P(0) =

TT(1-a2 cos2 0)2 (1 - a2)3/2 sin 0

(12)

V1 - a2 cos2 0 1 + 2a2 cos2 0 arccos (-a cos 0) + 3a cos 0

with a -> -0.25 for long chains. 39

The non-bonded, long-range intramolecular energy, Ubb, is represented as a sum of pair-wise interactions given by the effective IECG intermolecular potential, Job(r), formally derived in previous publications, 36,38,40 and discussed below.

The intermolecular IECG internal energy, Vinter (Rn), is a sum of pairwise interactions between CG sites on different chains:

n-1 n nb nb

UJ.bb inter (Rn) = i=1 j>i a=1 y=1 U

(13)

where riajy = ria - rjyl.

The effective potential, Ubb Jeff (r), is determined by in- verting a physically reasonable closure to the PRISM equation. For descriptions of molecular liquids at the site level with relatively short-range interactions, a closure to the PRISM equation31 that accounts for correlations at the molecular level appears to be necessary.31,41 How- ever, the IECG potential, Ubb (r), is long-ranged and an atomic closure that models well long-range interactions is sufficient. In this case, the hypernetted-chain (HNC) closure serves this purpose well. Inverting that closure yields

Uth(r) = - kBT [In (gbb(r)) - hbb(r)+ cbb(r)] , (14)

and so the CG potential depends on the intermolecu- lar total correlation function hbb (r) between blobs, where gbb(r) = hbb(r) + 1, and the blob direct correlation func- tion, cbb(r).

The repulsive pair potential appearing in Eq.(10) is chosen to be Eq.(14), but with the potential of mean force subtracted:

Urep(r) = Uef(r) + kBT In (gbb(r))

5

= kBT [hbb (r) - cbb (r)]. (15) e -nogb - nye-gb + n6 - 1

The second expression is the negative of the HNC medium-induced potential and so is repulsive at short distances as required.

The above forms for Ubb bond and Ubb make the CG in- tramolecular energy dependent on density and tempera- ture through hbb (r) and cob(r). Since this energy is used

to compute the partition functions Zn for any n, in the IECG theory one selects the density of the true liquid. In that way, the partition function of a single isolated chain, Zbb, depends on the density of the liquid into which the chain will be inserted.

An appropriate PRISM equation relates cob(r) to hbb(r). In Fourier space it is

¿bb (k) = Îbb (k)/[nb§2bb (k) [§2bb (k) + Pohbb (k)] , (16)

where a caret denotes the Fourier transform of its re- spective quantity, with k being the wavevector, and Öbb (k) is the blob-blob intramolecular structure factor, i.e., Fourier transform of the intramolecular pair distri- bution function (pdf). The effective potential is then uniquely specified knowing hbb (r) .

This intermolecular total correlation function between CG sites, hbb(r), can be computed from the monomer- monomer correlation function, hmm (r), using an exten- sion to liquids of multiblob chains of an equation derived by Krackoviak, Hansen and Louis (KHL) for polymers in solutions represented as soft spheres.42 To do this, KHL divide the sites on the chain into real ones and fictitious ones, the latter in our case being CG units (blobs). They then adopt a Chandler-Andersen interpretation of the di- rect correlation function, which means it behaves as an effective potential. In that way, the direct correlation between a blob and any other site (monomer or blob) is approximated as zero. The KHL equation in Fourier space becomes in our case36,38,40

Îbb (k) = Âbm (k)2Îmm(k)/Âºmm(k)2 .

(17)

Since Eq.(17) relies on the knowledge of hmm(r) at long wavelengths, it might seem that determining hbb(r) would necessitate extending simulations over very long times, a situation best avoided. However, as discussed below, the IECG theory employs an alternative approach that only requires short-time information, such as for the pressure.

The intramolecular structure factors in Eqs.(16) and (17) for a flexible chain are all appropriately normalized, and denoted as $2(0) = 1.36,38,40 The monomer-monomer structure factor can be reasonably approximated using the Debye function40

mm (k) = . 2 b

2 (пьдь - 1 + е-тьдь) , (18)

q

b

where qb = q/nb and q = k2(R2)/6. And the blob- monomer one is similarly found to be

1/2

§bm (k) = 1

VIT erf (9)

Je- e 9b/12

nb

1/2 qb

2

− 2 -

nbqb(e-ab - 1)e-9b/3 1) , (19)

while the blob-blob one is

Abb(k) = 1+2(e-2090-nbe-90+no-1 n2(e-qb - 1)2 e-2qb/3 .

(20)

In liquids of long polymer chains, we observe a very high level of accuracy in the agreement between the nu- merical and analytical solutions for these intramolecular structure factors. 34

Lastly, the total correlation function for monomer- monomer interactions in Eq.(17) is determined by the monomer-monomer PRISM equation.28 In Fourier space, this equation can be expressed as

ĥmm (k) = @mm (k)2 2mm (k) /[1 - pâmm (k)2mm (k)] . (21)

Here @mm (k) = NOmm (k), with the latter being defined in Eq.(18) above. Determining the Fourier transform of the direct correlation function, êmm (k), is the final step in completing the theory.

In previous studies of the IECG theory for long poly- mer chains, it has been observed that êmm (k) can be ac- curately approximated by just its k = 0 value, êmm (k = 0) = Co. This can be attributed to the fact that the CG effective potential exhibits a significantly longer range than the actual monomer-monomer interaction poten- tial. Consequently, also the direct correlation functions, who are functions of their potentials, also follow a sim- ilar pattern. Thus, the full IECG potential, Vinter' which depends on the monomer direct correlation func- tion through the equations above, is defined after the fitting of a single adjustable parameter, c0 (for more de- tails, please refer to the Supplementary Material (SM)).

Within the IECG theory, the value of c0 is, in turn, derived from the knowledge of the pressure. For high- density systems comprising long polymer chains, the HNC closure can be effectively approximated by the Mean Spherical Approximation (MSA) closure. In this context, Eq.(14) is replaced by Ubb(r) = - kBTcbb(r). From this, the pressure in the IECG theory can be ex- pressed as34,40

P

1 PchkBT = PNco 2

.

(22)

This CG pressure is subsequently equated with the pressure of the actual system, thereby determining the value of c0. Through this parameter, the characteris- tics of the CG system, including the energies Ultra and inter, are established once the pressure of the actual sys- tem, which is a quantity that rapidly reaches equilibrium in a simulation, is determined.

## C. Chemical potential in the IECG theory



Let's begin by considering the ideal contribution to the chemical potential, as given in Eq.(5). By substituting Eq.(8) into (5), we can observe that pid appears to de- pend strongly on the degree of coarse-graining through nb. This is the case even when we take into account that the average bond length l tends to decrease as nb increases. This behavior is expected to persist even for more realistic chain models.

6

Note however that in determining phase coexistence, the chemical potentials of the two phases must be equal. Therefore, it is the difference between the chemical po- tentials of the two phases that matters. To address this, we introduce a reference single-chain intramolecular en- ergy, designated as Ub', and define the difference between this reference and Ubb for n = 1 as AUihr intra . With these definitions in place, we can reframe Eq.(5) using a Widom-like approach as

Pid = - kBT In A3non Le-BAUbb intra Zo

. (23)

Here, the average (()0) is taken with respect to Ubb, while Z0 denotes the partition function of a single chain in the reference system. The calculation of this single-chain av- erage can be achieved through simulations. Since Z0 re- mains (approximately) the same for both phases, it can be set to Vģ, with the specific value of $ being disre- garded. Consequently, all the relevant terms in Mid can be determined in a straightforward manner.

Now, let's turn our attention to the excess chemical po- tential, as defined in Eq.(6). To simplify this equation, we follow a traditional approach proposed by Hansen43 and Verlet44 for simple liquids. The objective is to re- duce the equation to a form that depends solely on the quantities defined in Sec. II B above.

Following the conventional procedure for simple liq- uids, we regard the intermolecular energy, Unter, as a Vinter' smoothly varying function of a switching parameter, A, which characterizes the coupling of an inserted particle with its surrounding matrix. When A = 1, the system consists of n molecules, including the inserted one, fully interacting, while \ = 0 represents a scenario where the inserted molecule does not interact with the remaining n - 1 molecules. 45

With this in mind, Eq.(6) can be expressed as

bb Hexc -kBT da Oln 2 a ln Zbb (A)

(24)

Let's assume that there is no change in the intramolec- ular structure of the inserted CG chain as the interaction parameter \ is gradually increased. Under this assump- tion, the excess potential in the HNC approximation for off (r), as given in Eq.(14), adopts the form proposed by Hansen43 and Verlet44:

1

Рехс ~ квТпьрь

dr

hbb (r)[hbb (r) - cbb (r)] - cbb (r).

2

(25)

Furthermore, when applying the MSA closure (that can be derived from the HNC closure by assuming that the pair distribution function is equal to 1), Eq.(25) sim- plifies to

Hexc bb ~- kBTnopb | dr cbb(r) = - NkBTPco . (26)

It is important to note that within these approxima- tions, both the pressure and the excess chemical poten- tial remain invariant in relation to the degree of coarse- graining. Interestingly both Eq. (22) and Eq.(26) do not

depend on the number of blobs, nb. This property proves to be valuable when employing the IECG model to con- struct simulations that encompass multiple scales for a polymer liquid, as it allows the flexibility to fine-tune the simulation resolution as needed.

In the context of a CG polymer modeled as a single soft sphere, where the intramolecular contribution to the excess chemical potential is null, Eq.(25) and (26) are expected to be very accurate. In a multiblob representa- tion, the excess chemical potential will also include an in- tramolecular contribution, which incorporates the effect of chain structure change from the ideal to melt state. For a long polymer chain partitioned in a small number of soft blobs, the influence of excluded volume effects is expected to be minimal, so that intramolecular contri- bution to pexc can be safely neglected. However, as we progressively divide the polymer into an increasing num- ber of CG sites, each representing shorter and shorter segments, this approximation is expected to become pro- gressively less reliable.

But are these expectations correct? That is, if one computed pek, from a realistic simulation of the CG sys- tem, would it be invariant at least up to a modest number of CG units, say nb ≤ 6? Also, would its value be well ap- proximated by Eq.(25) or (26)? In the following sections, we present evidence to address these questions.

## III. METHODS



## A. IECG simulations



In this section we provide a comprehensive description of the coarse-grained simulation methodology employed to validate the theoretical framework. Siepmann and coworkers have developed an open-source software pack- age named that performs Gibbs ensemble Monte Carlo for Complex Chemical Systems (MCCCS) for perform- ing Gibbs Ensemble Monte Carlo (GEMC) simulations of polymers and other molecular systems. This software incorporate the gradual chain insertion technique us- ing the configuration-biased Monte Carlo (CBMC) algo- rithm. The code has been further extended and equipped with a user-friendly interface by Martin in a version called MCCCS Towhee.29 Initially, we extended the MC- CCS code to compute the excess chemical potential for polymer liquids in the united atom representations, em- ploying the CBMC methodology. Then we included the IECG model to calculate the excess chemical potential of coarse-gained polymers. We modified an old version of the MCCCS code from 2010, V2.2.

The modified code, herein referred to as "MCCCS- CG", is employed to perform Monte Carlo simulations of the IECG liquid. It is used to calculate the energy variation and the corresponding change in chemical po- tential resulting from the insertion of a single CG chain.

The MCCCS-CG code differs from the original MC- CCS V2.2 in three minor ways: 1) all pairwise potentials such as Ubb eff (r), Eq.(14), are computed on a grid of points

7

in r and read from a file. 2) to perform chain insertion the CBMC algorithm is not used, but we use a simpler al- gorithm based upon the expressions for Ubber and Ubb intra discussed in Sec. IIB above. In this algorithm different conformations of polymer chains are added all at once since the potentials are soft and the number of blobs is small, and the probability of insertion of the whole IECG chain in one step is found to be high, even in high-density melts. Lastly, 3) a simple Widom expression is used to compute the excess chemical potential.

This Widom expression is merely Eq.(6), which can be rewritten as

Hexc = - kBT In (exp (-BAUbb inter) > . (27)

In this context, AU.bb inter represents the interaction energy of the inserted particle and the existing polymer matrix. The brackets (( )) denote an average over the configura- tions of the inserted chain and the preexisting ones. To calculate this value, a chain is introduced into the poly- mer matrix, and the change in internal energy resulting from the insertion is determined. Upon repeated inser- tions and equilibration of the polymer matrix itself, the average in Eq.(27) is then obtained.

In the initial stage, we selected a cubic box with pe- riodic boundary conditions and prepared an equilibrated polymer matrix through Monte Carlo simulations. To attain equilibrium of the IECG multiblob liquid, the MCCCS-CG code implements three distinct types of moves in each cycle: rotation of a single-chain around its center-of-mass, linear translation of the center-of-mass, and translation of individual CG sites. When repre- senting the polymers as soft-spheres, the only move per- formed is the translation of the center-of-mass. Each move is attempted on a randomly selected chain and re- peated a number of times equal to the total number of polymers within the sample. Translational moves of each IECG site are attempted 50 % of the times, molecule translations are tried 40 % of the times, and a molecular rotations are attempted 10 % of the times.

Following the completion of an entire equilibration cy- cle, the MCCCS-CG code initiates thousands of attempts to insert complete polymer chains. The code selects a conformation for insertion from the existing matrix's population in a random manner. As a result of this pro- cess, the distribution of conformation for the inserted chain statistically complies with the correct Boltzmann distributions for bonds and angles. The chain's confor- mational statistic adhere to an unperturbed distribution prior to insertion.

Remarkably, we observe that the convergence of pexc is quite rapid when utilizing the MCCCS-CG code. Con- vergence is typically achieved after approximately 105 insertions for soft spheres and up to 107 insertions for chains represented by ten blobs. The number of steps re- quired for convergence tends to increase as the number of monomers within each blob decreases, primarily because the IECG potential exhibits a sharper profile.

To expedite the computation, we introduced a cut-off distance for the intermolecular potential and incorpo-

rated the necessary tail corrections when recording the excess chemical potential, following the approach em- ployed in the original MCCCS V2.2 code.

## IV. RESULTS



## A. An example of MCCCS-CG calculations: the excess chemical potential as a function of density and temperature for a polymer liquid with a degree of polymerization, N=44



As an initial illustration of the method we use in MCCCS-CG simulations, we present calculations con- cerning the excess chemical potential for high-density melts composed of relatively short polymer chains, with N = 44 monomers. This is a scenario where the insertion procedure rapidly achieves convergence.

0

T = 473 K T = 503 K T = 523 K

-10

CCA3

-20

-30

-40

-50

680

700

720

740

p (kg/m )

760

780

800

FIG. 1. The values of c0 computed from atomistic simulations of polymer melts of degree N = 44 at increasing density and at different temperature. Data are fitted by equations that allow one to extrapolate the parameters to polymer melts of other densities and temperatures. A similar functional expression effectively interpolates the c0 data across various degrees of polymerization (see the SM for details)

The force field input to the MCCCS-CG simulations that calculate the excess chemical potential is the CG IECG forcefield described in Sec.II B above, which de- pends on the monomer-monomer direct correlation func- tion, c0, through the HNC closure. As mentioned there, Co is determined by equating the CG pressure with that of the true system, which here we take to be an atom- istic molecular dynamics (MD) simulation of the same system. The LAMMPS atomistic simulation software46 was used.

Figure 1 shows the optimized c0 parameter for a series of simulations at three distinct temperatures and increas- ing densities. The optimized parameter traces a seam- less curve that can be conveniently fitted by an empirical equation as a function of density and temperature. A similar functional expression effectively interpolates the Co data across various degrees of polymerization (see the SM for more details). By extrapolating these empirical

8

1500

:selected: :selected:

1

IECG MC simulation, soft sphere, T = 473K IECG MC simulation, soft sphere, T = 523K MD atomistic simulation, T = 473K MD atomistic simulation, T=523K Analytical virial MSA closure, T=523K

.00 :unselected:

:unselected:

1000

:unselected: Analytical virial MSA closure, T=473K

Pressure (atm)

500

0

660 680

700

720 740 760

p (kg/m3) 3

780 800

FIG. 2. Comparison of the virial pressure measured in the MCCCS-CG simulation for PE melts with N = 44 and chains represented by one soft sphere with the virial pres- sure measured in atomistic MD simulations performed with the LAMMPS code. The soft sphere IECG simulations are performed at temperatures T = 473 K (blue circles) and T = 523 K (violet circles). The atomisitc LAMMPS sim- ulations are performed at the same temperatures, T = 473 K (blue squares) and T = 523 K (pink squares). For the atom- istic simulations, we also report the variance of the measured pressure. In contrast, the variance of the pressure in the CG simulation is smaller than the size of the symbols. The pres- sure agreement between the CG MC and the atomistic MD simulations is quantitative at both temperatures. The an- alytical solution of the virial pressure with our model and the mean-field MSA closure at T = 473 K (green line) and T = 523 K (orange line) also shows quantitative agreement.

equations, we can calculate the IECG potential for novel state points, obviating the necessity for new atomistic simulations. Consequently, the IECG potential proves transferable to diverse polymer liquids operating under different thermodynamic conditions.

Subsequently, equipped with the solved IECG poten- tial as input, we executed MCCCS-CG simulations on the CG polymer liquid. To assess the accuracy of the MCCCS-CG simulation in establishing a suitably equi- librated liquid matrix for chain insertion, our initial step involved verifying that the structural and thermo- dynamic properties of the IECG melt, as predicted by MCCCS-CG code, align with the properties observed in an equivalent atomistic MD simulation. The details of the MD simulation are reported in the SM.

Figure 2 shows the pressure as a function of density computed from the MCCCS-CG and atomistic LAMMPS simulations at various thermodynamic conditions. As can be seen, results of the two types of simulations are in excellent agreement, even though the variance in the atomistic simulation data is much larger than for the CG for the same run time. This agreement indirectly validates the analytical approximation to the pressure, Eq.(22), including the use of the MSA closure.

It is important to note that Figure 2 selectively presents pressure data for the highest and the lowest temperatures simulated. This approach is taken to pre- vent undue clutter, as including intermediate tempera- ture data could overly complicate the visualization. How-

50

40

----

30

- - Extrapolated equation using co

:unselected: Numerical solution Verlet: HNC closure Analytical solution Verlet: MSA closure :selected:

:selected: O IECG MC simulation: soft sphere

:selected:

:selected:

Excess Chemical Potential (kcal/mol)

:unselected:

:selected: :selected:

:selected:

20

:selected:

10

0

660 680

700

720 740

p (kg/m )

760 780 800

FIG. 3. Excess chemical potential, Hexc, as a function of den- sity, p, for a PE melt with N = 44 for three different temper- atures (from the top to the bottom: T = 473 K, 503 K, and 523 K). Theory predictions using the HNC closure, Eq.(25) are shown as black squares, predictions using the MSA clo- sure, Eq.(26) are shown as solid blue triangles, and MCCCS- CG simulation data are shown as red circles. The polymers are modeled as soft spheres, so nb = 1. The black dashed line corresponds to predictions using the MSA closure with extrapolated data of c0 shown in Fig. 1.

ever, it is worth highlighting that a comparable level of agreement is observed for the intermediate temperature as well. The MCCCS-CG and atomistic LAMMPS sim- ulations were also found to be in agreement for the pair distribution function, gob(r), as reported in the SM. As mentioned above, in the atomistic simulation the pres- sure equilibrates quickly. Consequently, the determina- tion of c0 only necessitates a relatively short MD trajec- tory of a few nanoseconds (less than 3 ns even for the longest chains considered in this study, N = 720).

Figure 3 shows the excess chemical potential as func- tion of density for three temperatures, T = 473 K, 503 K, and 523 K. Data from the MCCCS-CG simulation, the numerical solution of the HNC expression, Eq.(25), and the analytical MSA solution, Eq.(26), are shown. As an- ticipated, the chemical potential increases with increas- ing density since inserting the chain becomes more chal- lenging with greater crowding. Increasing the tempera- ture though facilitates chain insertion, thereby reducing Hexc, as one would expect. As can also be seen, the nu- merical and analytical values are in excellent agreement with each other, and with the simulation data.

Additionally, we subjected the MSA equation govern- ing the excess chemical potential to testing using the em- pirical equation that characterizes the density-dependent behavior of the direct correlation function, c0, (see Fig- ure 1). Notably, the resulting dashed line depicted in Figure 3 precisely intersects the numerical values of the recently computed excess chemical potential. This agree- ment highlights that the MSA approximation stands ca- pable of offering a dependable initial estimate for the excess chemical potential within high-density polymer melts.

Figure 4 confirms this invariance by showing the be-

9

havior of pexc for a longer chain, N = 300. Across differ- ent temperatures and densities, this invariance remains up to a partition of the chain in nb = 10 CG sites, where each site represents a Nb = 30 monomer segment. Again, simulation data and theory predictions are in excellent agreement. Throughout both figures, any notable devi- ations from the constant trend emerge under the condi- tions of lowest temperature and highest density, where the insertion of the chain becomes less favorable.

As anticipated, the invariance in the IECG model is ro- bust, albeit it diminishes as the coarse grained chain is di- vided into shorter and shorter segments. Specifically, pre- dictions with CG sites that include Nb = 30 monomers differ slightly from those of larger Nb (smaller nb). Un- der such conditions, the distribution of monomers within the chain starts deviating from Gaussian statistics. This invariance stands as a valuable trait of the IECG model, particularly in the context of multiscale modeling pro- cedures, ensuring that the granularity of the CG model can be flexibly adjusted without introducing undesirable spurious forces.

## B. The excess chemical potential is independent of the granularity of the model



The analytical solution of the excess chemical poten- tial under conditions of high density and low granularity, Eq.(26), indicates that it remains unaffected by the de- gree of coarse-graining, nb, in the IECG model. However, as the conditions required for the application of the MSA closure cease to be met, the invariance of poke with nb becomes questionable. In this section, we explore the steadfastness of the analytical approximation of pex by varying the CG granularity in the chain model.

The accuracy of the IECG theory to estimate the ex- cess chemical potential at various levels of coarse-graining is first validated by comparing the predictions of Eq.(25) with MCCCS-CG simulation data that use Eq.(27). We examined a polymer melt with degrees of polymerization of 300 at a density of p = 766 kg/m3.

The results from the MCCCS-CG code are listed for various levels of coarse-graining in Table I. This Table displays the calculated values of the excess chemical po- tential along with their corresponding tail corrections. It is evident that these tail corrections are indispensable for ensuring the accuracy of the chemical potential calcula- tions. Once these tail corrections are incorporated, the excess chemical potential values from IECG simulations become nearly independent of the model's granularity.

The right side of Table I also presents the chemical po- tential values derived from the IECG theory, demonstrat- ing excellent agreement with the excess chemical poten- tial obtained from the MCCCS-CG simulations. There- fore, both IECG simulations and IECG theory indicate that the excess chemical potential remains unaffected by the specific CG model adopted, as long as the IECG poly- mer coarse-graining approach is utilized.

It is worth noting that, to the best of our knowl-

edge, direct comparisons between the results of the chem- ical potential for melts of long polymer chains from the IECG theory or simulations and atomistic simulations are currently computationally unfeasible. However, fu- ture work will explore the exciting possibility of combin- ing the IECG method with advanced MC algorithms at the atomistic level, which could pave the way for such calculations, as discussed later.

TABLE I. Comparison of the values of the excess chemical potential obtained from the IECG MC simulations (Eq.(27): Hexc,sim ) and the IECG theory (Eq.(25): Hexc, theory ) for melts of polyethylene chains with degree of polymerization, N = 300. The table also reports the tail corrections for the cal- culations of the excess chemical potential from IECG simu- lations. The density of polymer melt is p = 766 kg/m3, and their temperature is T = 503 K. The systems have variable cut-off distance, Tout, variable box length, la, and variable number of molecules, n. Each polymer is modeled with a vari- able number of blobs, no. All the simulations were performed with the MCCCS-CG code. To the best of our knowledge, it is currently computationally intractable to obtain the excess chemical potential at the atomistic resolutions for these sys- tems.



|nb|n|Å|Tcut Å|Utail kcal/mol|Hexc, sim kcal/mol|Hexc, theory kcal/mol|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1|20258|569.17|210.8|-8.1|89.0± 0.5|89.0|
|2|6211|383.8|127.9|-6.7|88.4± 0.7|88.6|
|3|2610|287.5|95.8|-6.7|87.9±0.9|88.1|
|4|1416|234.5|78.2|-5.1|87.2+ 1.1|87.8|
|6|799|193.7|58.7|-4.1|86.4+ 1.5|87.2|
|10|300|139.8|40.9|-2.8|86.2 2.0|86.8|


Figure 4 confirms this consistency by demonstrating the independence of the excess chemical potential for IECG chains with N = 300 monomers across different temperatures and densities: this consistency remains up to a partition of the chain in nb = 10 CG sites, where each site represents a Nb = 30 monomer segment. The excess chemical potential from the IECG theory and IECG sim- ulations are in remarkable agreement. Throughout both figures, any notable deviations from the constant trend emerge under the conditions of lowest temperature and highest density, where the insertion of the chain becomes more challenging.

Figure 5 further illustrates the dependence of the ex- cess chemical potential, as determined by the IECG sim- ulations, at various temperatures and densities for the N = 192 polyethylene chain. This dependence is ex- plored in relation to the number of blobs utilized to par- tition the chain. Notably, we observe that the excess chemical potential is independent of the CG representa- tion , holding true for a number of CG sites up to nb = 6. For this system, each site corresponds to a segment com- prising Nb = 32 monomers. Other structural and ther- modynamic properties of the IECG melt, as predicted by our Monte Carlo code are reported in the SM.

As anticipated, the thermodynamic consistency inher-

10

200

G-O -O -O- O

150

100 Excess Chemical Potential (kcal/mol)

G

0

G

50

i

1 0

-0

1

0

2

4

6

8

10

Number of CG sites (n)

FIG. 4. Excess chemical potential for a melt of PE chains of degree of polymerization, N = 300, at variable temperature and density. From the top to the bottom: blue symbols T = 503 K and p = 797 kg/m3; red symbols T = 513 K and p = 766 kg/m3; cyan symbols T = 503 K and p = 766 kg/m3; green symbols T = 503 K and p = 744 kg/m3. Each chain is CG at variable levels of resolution, with a number of CG sites nb = 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 10. The data from the IECG simulations (circles) agree with the theoretical solutions of the excess chemical potential (squares). The horizontal dashed lines are a guide to the eye and show that the excess chemical potential is mostly insensitive to the granularity of the IECG model.

100

75

:selected:

0 --- 0

P

O

Excess Chemical Potential (kcal/mol)

50

25

0 ---- 0 --- @ ---- 0

0

1

2 3

4

5

Number of CG sites (n))

6

7

FIG. 5. Excess chemical potential for a melt of PE chains of degree of polymerization, N = 192, at variable tempera- ture and density. From the top to the bottom: red symbols T = 513 K and p = 766 kg/m3; blue symbols T = 503 K and p = 766 kg/m3; green symbols T = 503 K and p = 744 kg/m3. Each chain is CG at variable levels of resolution, with a number of CG sites nb = 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6. The data from the MCCCS-CG simulations (circles) agree with the theoret- ical solution of the excess chemical potential (squares). The horizontal dashed lines are a guide to the eye and show that the excess chemical potential is mostly insensitive to the gran- ularity of the IECG model.

ent to the IECG model showcases robustness, albeit this robustness diminishes as the CG chain is segmented into shorter and shorter segments. Specifically, CG sites that include Nb = 30 monomers shows some degree of in- consistency. Under such conditions, the distribution of monomers within the chain starts deviating from Gaus- sian statistics. Nonetheless, the consistency of the excess

chemical potential remains valid when the chain is par- titioned in a variable number of CG units. This aspect stands as a valuable trait of the IECG model, particu- larly in the context of multiscale modeling procedures, ensuring that the granularity of the CG model can be flexibly adjusted without introducing undesirable spuri- ous forces.

In the context of a CG polymer modeled as a single soft sphere, where the intramolecular contribution to the excess chemical potential is null, Eqs. (25) and (26) are expected to be very accurate. In a multiblob represen- tation, the excess chemical potential will also include an intramolecular contribution, which incorporates the ef- fect of chain structure change from the ideal to melt state. For a long polymer chain partitioned in a small number of soft blobs, the influence of excluded volume effects is expected to be minimal, so that intramolecular corrections to pexc are negligible. However, as we pro- gressively divide the polymer into an increasing number of CG sites, each representing shorter chain segments in- teracting through sharper repulsive blob potentials, this approximation is expected to become progressively less reliable.

## C. Testing the code capabilities by increasing the polymer chain length



Figure 6 shows the excess chemical potential in both the soft sphere (nb = 1) and the three-blob chain (nb = 3) representations for a PE melt. As can be seen, alter- ing the degree of CG within the IECG model appears to have no effect, at least within this range of nb. Fur- thermore, note that perc increases with increasing chain length since inserting a longer chain causes a greater in- crease in the internal energy due to the greater num- ber of, predominantly repulsive at this density,32 inter- site interactions. The agreement between CG simula- tion and theory is excellent, with both the HNC and MSA theory predictions being essentially the same. Note that the MCCCS-CG code adeptly computes the excess chemical potential for a PE chain consisting of N = 720 monomers. This is in stark contrast to conventional in- sertion methods for atomistic models, which remain con- strained to either shorter chains or lower densities.

In the SM we report the excess chemical potential at increasing density and at variable temperature. We ob- serve that an increase in density amplifies the relevance of the repulsive energetic contributions. Consequently, the slope of the excess chemical potential as a function of degree of polymerization becomes more pronounced at higher densities. A similar effect is observed when the simulation temperature is lowered because the insertion of progressively longer chains results in more pronounced chain superposition, accompanied by heightened repul- sive interactions.

11

250

200

O

150

Excess Chemical Potential (kcal/mol)

--

O

100

-C

50

:selected:

0 200

400

600

N

800

FIG. 6. Excess chemical potential for a melt of PE in the CG representation as a function of chain length at the density of 766 kg/m3 and temperature T = 503 K. Data from MCCCS- CG simulations with nb = 1 (red circles), and simulations with nb = 3 (solid blue triangles) are shown. Theory pre- dictions for nb = 1 from the numerical solution of the HNC expression, Eq.(25) (black squares), and the analytical MSA solution, Eq.(26) (green circles) are also shown, but they are obscured by the simulation data points, being essentially iden- tical in value. The black dashed line is the MSA prediction that uses the fit for c0 in the short-chain limit, extrapolated to long chains, as shown in Figure 1.

## D. Chemical potential of a single polymer chain in vacuum in the CG representation



In this section, the computation of the single chain partition function, Zbb, is further investigated. To that end, it is helpful to examine a pseudo chemical potential, "intra", which is the average of the Boltzmann factor of the intramolecular potential for a single chain in vacuum:

Mintra = - kBT In [{exp (-BUintra)}]

=- kBT In

( J exp (-2BUintra (rnb)) dr"b

,

exp (-BUintra (rnb ) )drnb

(28)

where rnb denotes the configurational space of one poly- mer chain. In the relative coordinates, the intramolecular energy is given by the sum of three terms

nb-2

m

Uintra nb-1 Ubond(la) + γ Vangle(y) + > eff (TE),

α

(29)

with m = (np -2)(nb -3)/2 as the number of non-bonded interactions. Therefore, in the relative coordinates, Eq. (28) can be rewritten as

Pintra = - kBT In Jexp (-BUintra)d Jexp (-2BUintra)dT

(30)

where I represents the internal molecular coordinates, 1, 0, and r. Considering Eqs. (28) to (30) and the Jaco-

bians, one obtains

Pintra =ln

L

nb-1 dlexp (-28 ℃ Ubond (li)

-kBT

nb -1 i

J dlexp (-B > Ubond (li)

i [ de exp (-28 ℃ i

+ ln

nb-2 Uangle

(0;)

nb-2

f de exp ( -6 _ Uangle

(0;)

i

12

sites. The agreement between theory and simulations is quite robust, suggesting that the analytical expression of Eq. (32) gives a faithful representation of an isolated CG polymer chain.

50

40

(31)

30

m (-28 EUnb (ri)

§dr exp

i

+ ln

S dr exp ( -BEUnb(ri)

m

2

where each bolded integration measure is an appropri- ate relative coordinate for the particular intramolecular potential and contains all of the internal coordinates for example, dl = 12dl 12dl2 . .. . 'n6-1) dl(nb-1). Each inte- gral in a given term for the CG polymers of this study will contribute equally so we can rewrite each term as a single integral to the appropriate power.

fintra = (nb - 1) fbond + (nb - 2) pangle + munb, (32)

where

## "bond = -kBT In Jexp (-BUbond(l))12 dl



## Jexp (-2BUbond(l))12 dl)



Jexp (-2BU angle (0)) sin 0 de

Pangle = -kBT In ~ Jexp (-BUangle (0)) sin 0 de

Unb = -kBT In Jexp (-28Unb(r)) r2dr ) (33) exp (-BUnb(r))r2dr

)]

In the IECG model, the non-bonded potential is bound and soft. Thus, the change in the intramolecular chemi- cal potential due to non-bonded blob-blob interactions is small relative to the bond and angle contributions. As a consequence, we observe that the intramolecular chemi- cal potential of Eq.(32) scales linearly with the number of CG units that make up a chain, nb.

This linear scaling is confirmed by MCCCS-CG sim- ulation data of Hintra for a CG polymer with degree of polymerization N = 720, as shown in Fig. 7. We cal- culated Hintra by simulating a single polymer in vacuum, where the change in internal energy is measured by in- sertion of a single chain in the gas phase at the selected temperature. Note that multiple insertions of various single chain conformations were performed to obtain the gas-phase chemical potential of the single polymer chain at a given level of coarse-graining.

The linear scaling was also obtained in calculations of the chemical potential for a polyethylene chain with N = 300. Table II directly compares intra measured in simulations using Eq.(28) with the theoretical expres- sions from Eq.(32) for this particular sample. Each poly- mer chain is coarse grained by nb = 1 up to 10 CG

Hintra (kcal/mol)

20

10

0

0 5

10

15

20

Number of CG sites (n)

25

30

FIG. 7. The "intramolecular" chemical potential estimated from simulations for different levels of CG of an isolated polyethylene chain with degree of polymerization N = 720 at a temperature of T = 503 K (black circles). The trend-line is a linear fit to the data.

TABLE II. Theoretical (Eq.(32)) and simulated (Eq.(28)) "intramolecular" chemical potential of a single polyethylene chain CG with the IECG approach. Each polymer simulated has a degree of polymerization, N = 300, and variable num- ber of CG sites, nb. The samples is at temperature T = 503 K in vacuum. The errors for the simulations are around 0.01 kcal/mol.



|nb|Mintra (sim) (kcal/mol)|Hintra (theory) (kcal/mol)|
|---|---|---|
|1|0|0|
|2|1.45|1.44|
|3|3.38|3.38|
|4|5.35|5.26|
|6|9.18|9.14|
|10|16.20|16.81|


We note that a similar linear correlations for the chem- ical potential of the isolated chain at atomistic resolu- tion, where the chemical potential scales linearly with the number of monomers in the polymer chain, was pre- viously derived from simulations of zero-density freely- jointed hard sphere chains18 and zero density bead-spring chains. 15 Thus, the scaling of Aintra with the number of CG units is consistent with the scaling with its number of monomers as it should, given the definition of the number of CG units nb = N/Nb with No the number of monomers in one chain.

## V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS



In summary, the Integral Equation theory of Coarse- Graining (IECG) was employed to compute the excess

chemical potential of flexible polymer liquids, leading to the derivation of straightforward expressions. In the IECG approach, polymer liquids are modeled as collec- tions of coarse-grained (CG) chains, with each CG site representing a segment of monomers. It is essential that the size of the chain segment exceeds the polymer per- sistence length to adhere to the Gaussian statistics of monomer pair distributions and meet the theory's pre- requisites for direct correlation functions.

A comparison was made between the predictions of the IECG theory for polyethylene melts and data from corre- sponding simulations that utilized the derived IECG ef- fective potential. This IECG simulation code was a minor extension of the atomistic Gibbs ensemble Monte Carlo software created by Siepmann and co-workers. The study examined conditions involving varying density, tempera- ture, chain length (ranging from N = 44 to 720), and the degree of coarse-graining. In all cases, the agreement be- tween theory and simulation regarding the excess chem- ical potential was found to be excellent. Equally signifi- cant, the invariance of the excess chemical potential with respect to the degree of coarse-graining, as predicted by the theory, was confirmed by the CG simulation for prac- tical values of the number of coarse-graining sites.

Developing a procedure for conveniently computing the excess free energy and phase diagrams of dense poly- mer liquids has long been a goal in polymer physics and engineering. Particle-insertion methods effectively cap- ture the energy change resulting from the insertion of a single molecule and perform optimally at low density and for short chains, where the insertion of a polymer chain is feasible through advanced methods, such as the configuration-bias Monte Carlo method and others. In contrast, field theories focus on the universal behaviors of polymeric systems and are better suited for high-density liquids composed of very long chains, where the specific chemical nature of the polymer is not essential and fluc- tuations are minimal. There is a region of study between these two extremes, where high-density liquids of long polymer chains are of interest, which needs to be ap- proached by alternative methods. In this region, fluc- tuations are essential, and differences in the chemical structures of the monomers can result in differences in the chemical potential and phase diagrams. Traditional methods struggle to explore this region effectively.

Nevertheless, it is possible to compute the excess chem- ical potential in a simulation by combining particle-based insertion methods with CG models featuring soft poten- tials. A CG representation in which the entire polymer is depicted as one soft sphere or a collection of soft spheres ensures that the attempted insertion of one polymer is readily accepted, as no sharp repulsive interactions exist during the direct insertion of the soft particle. However, having a CG model with soft interactions is necessary but not sufficient to perform reliable calculations of the excess chemical potential.

A second necessary condition for success is that the CG model accurately predicts the polymer liquid's ther- modynamic properties. Two well-established CG models

13

of polymers that represent a chain as a soft sphere are the dissipative particle dynamics (DPD) approach and the IECG model, the latter of which is employed here as mentioned above. Both methods offer computational convenience because the soft sphere representation signif- icantly speeds up CG simulations compared to atomistic simulations. The short-ranged shape of the DPD poten- tial further enhances computational efficiency as it does not require large simulation boxes, unlike IECG. How- ever, the DPD model has been designed to reproduce the dynamics and hydrodynamics of atomistic simulations but does not guarantee consistency in thermodynamic properties, making it unsuitable for calculating polymer phase diagrams.2

In contrast, the computational efficiency of the IECG approach primarily arises from the accelerated dynam- ics predicted by this model, which aligns with atomistic diffusion only once it is rescaled using the contributions due to the potential of mean force and the solution of the memory function.47 The distinct advantage of the IECG model lies in its ability to accurately reproduce both the structure and pressure of the atomistic description, as demonstrated in this work. Consistent pressure is cru- cial for accurately predicting the excess chemical poten- tial since these two quantities are formally interrelated through the thermodynamics of liquids.

Note that while the analytical solution of the excess chemical potential has been tested for long homopoly- mer melts in this study, the IECG method has broader applicability. It extends beyond the scope of this partic- ular application because it builds upon the foundation of atomistic PRISM, which was previously employed to in- vestigate various polymeric systems. The prior extension of the IECG approach to block-copolymers48 and poly- mer mixtures35,49,50 opens up the potential for calculat- ing the chemical potential and phase transition for these systems. Thus, the algorithms within the MCCCS-CG code may offer a precise means of predicting the excess chemical potential for a variety of polymeric systems with minimal computational demands.

While it is unfeasible to directly compare the IECG model with atomistic CBMC calculations for these melts of long chains, the IECG model can be directly param- eterized using a top-down approach. This involves fine- tuning the IECG model to replicate specific experimen- tal quantities, such as the system's solubility for small molecules dispersed in a polymer matrix. Please note that evaluating the solubility, which is the transfer of a solute between two solvation environments where one is a polymer liquid and the other is a gas phase, re- quires the use of the IECG approach for mixtures we have previously developed. 35,49,50 In this top-down approach, the IECG methodology ensures that important proper- ties remain consistent across various levels of granular- ity, while significantly outperforming conventional atom- istic GEMC methods in terms of speed. These attributes are vital prerequisite for accurately calculating the excess chemical potential for long-chain polymer liquids.

Regarding the potential applications of the IECG

method for atomistic chemical potential calculations, there are several feasible avenues. In CBMC algorithms5 trial configurations are generated with a bias favoring low-energy configurations on a unit-by-unit basis. How- ever, in dense polymer melts of long chains, identifying low-energy configurations becomes more challenging due to the high monomer density, which can result in highly repulsive interactions are short distances when inserting a polymer. Building on the insights from this study, it is conceivable to enhance existing CBMC algorithms for rel- atively large polymer chains by integrating CBMC tech- niques for united atom models with the coarse-grained representation of long-chain polymers. This process in- volves calculating Rosenbluth weights for growing the united atom units within a given CG site after insert- ing the CG polymer chain. The objective of growing polymer chains in this way is to enhance the efficiency of CBMC moves, which are currently limited to dense poly- mer melts with about 30 monomers, or even fewer de- pending on the monomer density, using commonly avail- able computational resources. A exciting avenue for re- constructing atomistic chains from CG configurations in- volves the utilization of machine learning models.51 The implementation of such an algorithm remains a subject for future research.

In summary, we have demonstrated that the excess chemical potential remains independent of the level of coarse-graining within the IECG method. This result is contingent on the fact that the excess chemical poten- tial is primarily influenced by the intermolecular compo- nent of the internal energy, which remains independent of the chosen level of coarse-graining within the IECG ap- proach. In contrast, a linear dependence on the number of 'blobs' is expected in the ideal part of the chemical po- tential, which is influenced by intramolecular internal en- ergy. Nevertheless, the intramolecular chemical potential of a long chain in the gas phase, unlike the excess chem- ical potential in the dense melt, can be computationally determined at atomistic resolutions when needed.

## VI. SUPPORTING INFORMATION



Description of the procedure used to perform Molec- ular Dynamics simulations at atomistic resolution, em- ployed to validate the coarse-grained model. Descrip- tion of the numerical procedure used to calculate the IECG potential. Validation of the MCCCS-CG simu- lations by comparison with LAMMPS atomistic simula- tions, specifically examining the radial distribution func- tion and pressure. Calculations of the excess chemical potential across various densities and temperatures for polyethylene melts with increasing degree of polymeriza- tion, ranging from N = 44 to N = 300.

14

## VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS



This work was partially supported by the donors of ACS Petroleum Research Fund under New Direction Grant 61648-ND6. M.G.G. served as Principal Investi- gator on ACS PRF 61648-ND6 that provided support for J.M .. This research was also partially supported by the National Science Foundation Grants No. CHE-1665466 and CHE-2154999. The computational work was per- formed on the supercomputers Comet and Expanse at the San Diego Supercomputer Center, with the support of ACCESS52 allocation Discover ACCESS CHE100082 (ACCESS is a program supported by the National Sci- ence Foundation under Grant No. ACI-1548562). We thank Dr. M. G. Martin for useful discussions. M.D. ac- knowledges the support by U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Chemical Sci- ences, Geosciences, and Biosciences Division, Condensed Phase and Interfacial Molecular Science program, FWP 16249. Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) is operated by Battelle for the U.S. DOE under Contract No. DE- AC05-76RL01830.

1M. D. Zoback, R. Apel, J. Baumgarter, M. Brudy, R. Em- mermann, B. Engeser, K. Fuchs, W. Kessels, H. Rischmuller, F. Rummel, and et al., "Simulating the critical properties of complex fluids," Nature 365, 330-332 (1993).

2D. Frenkel and B. Smit, Understanding Molecular Simulation, 2nd ed. (Elsevier, 2002).

3B. Wldom, "Some topics in the theory of fluids," J. Chem. Phys. 39, 2808-2812 (1963).

4B. Widom, "Structure of interfaces from uniformity of the chem- ical potential," J. Stat. Phys. 19, 563-574 (1978).

5 J. I. Siepmann, "A method for the direct calculation of chemical potentials for dense chain systems," Mol. Phys. 70, 1145-1158 (1990).

6M. N. Rosenbluth and A. W. Rosenbluth, "Monte carlo calcu- lation of the average extension of molecular chains," J. Chem. Phys. 23, 356-359 (1955).

7 J. J. De Pablo, M. Laso, and U. W. Suter, "Estimation of the chemical potential of chain molecules by simulation," J. Chem. Phys. 96, 2817 (1992).

8G. C. Mooij and D. Frenkel, "The overlapping distribution method to compute chemical potentials of chain molecules," J. Phys .: Condens. Matter 6, 3879-3888 (1994).

9T. J. Vlugt, M. G. Martin, B. Smit, J. I. Siepmann, and R. Kr- ishna, "Improving the efficiency of the configurational-bias Monte Carlo algorithm," Mol. Phys. 94, 727-733 (1998).

10M. G. Martin and J. I. Siepmann, "Transferable potentials for phase equilibria. 1. United-atom description of n-alkanes," J. Phys. Chem. B 102, 2569-2577 (1998).

11S. T. Cui, J. I. Siepmann, H. D. Cochran, and P. T. Cum- mings, "Intermolecular potentials and vapor-liquid phase equilib- ria of perfluorinated alkanes," Fluid Phase Equilibria 146, 51-61 (1998).

12Q. P. Chen, J. D. Chu, R. F. Dejaco, T. P. Lodge, and J. Ilja Siepmann, "Molecular simulation of olefin oligomer blend phase behavior," Macromolecules 49, 3975-3985 (2016).

13P. Grassberger, "Pruned-enriched Rosenbluth method: simula- tions of 0 polymers of chain length up to 1000000," Phys. Rev. E 55, 3682-3685 (1997).

14C. J. Rasmussen, A. Vishnyakov, and A. V. Neimark, "Calcula- tion of chemical potentials of chain molecules by the incremental gauge cell method," J. Chem. Phys. 135, 214109 (2011).

15S. K. Kumar, I. Szleifer, and A. Z. Panagiotopoulos, "Determina- tion of the chemical potentials of polymeric systems from Monte Carlo simulations," Phy. Rev. Lett. 66, 2935-2938 (1991).

16S. K. Kumar, "The chain length dependence of the chemical po- tentials of macromolecular systems at zero density: Exact calcu- lations and Monte Carlo simulations," J. Chem. Phys. 96, 1490- 1497 (1992).

17N. B. Wilding and M. Müller, "Accurate measurements of the chemical potential of polymeric systems by Monte Carlo simula- tion," J. Chem. Phys. 101, 4324-4330 (1994).

18F. A. Escobedo and J. J. De Pablo, "Monte Carlo simulation of the chemical potential of polymers in an expanded ensemble," J. Chem. Phys. 103, 2703-2710 (1995).

19T. Spyriouni, I. G. Economou, and D. N. Theodorou, "Thermo- dynamics of chain fluids from atomistic simulation: A test of the chain increment method for chemical potential," Macromolecules 30, 4744-4755 (1997).

20T. Spyriouni, I. G. Economou, and D. N. Theodorou, "Phase equilibria of mixtures containing chain molecules predicted through a novel simulation scheme," Phy. Rev. Lett. 80, 4466- 4469 (1998).

21 A. A. Galata, S. D. Anogiannakis, and D. N. Theodorou, "Thermodynamic analysis of Lennard-Jones binary mixtures us- ing Kirkwood-Buff theory," Fluid Phase Equilibria 470, 25-37 (2018).

22M. G. De Angelis, G. C. Boulougouris, and D. N. Theodorou, "Prediction of infinite dilution benzene solubility in linear polyethylene melts via the direct particle deletion method," J. Phys. Chem. B 114, 6233-6246 (2010).

23 H. Frauenkron and P. Grassberger, "Critical unmixing of polymer solutions," J. Chem. Phys. 107, 9599-9608 (1997).

24 J. M. Prausnitz, R. N. Lichtenthaler, and E. Gomes de Azevedo, Molecular Thermodynamics of Fluid-Phase Equilibria (Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1986).

25 J. Gross and G. Sadowski, "Modeling polymer systems using the perturbed-chain statistical associating fluid theory equation of state," Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 41, 1084- 1093 (2002).

26S. A. Baeurle, G. V. Efimov, and E. A. Nogovitsin, "On a new self-consistent-field theory for the canonical ensemble," J. Chem. Phys 124, 224110 (2006).

27M. G. Guenza, M. Dinpajooh, J. McCarty, and I. Y. Lyubimov, "Accuracy, transferability, and efficiency of coarse-grained mod- els of molecular liquids," J. Phys. Chem. B 122, 10257-10278 (2018).

28K. S. Schweizer and J. G. Curro, "PRISM theory of the structure, thermodynamics, and phase transitions of polymer liquids and alloys," in Atomistic Modeling of Physical Properties, Advances in Polymer Science (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1994) pp. 319- 377.

29M. G. Martin, "MCCCS Towhee: a tool for Monte Carlo molec- ular simulation," Mol. Simulat. 39, 1212-1222 (2013).

30 A. Z. Panagiotopoulos, "Adsorption and capillary condensation of fluids in cylindrical pores by monte carlo simulation in the gibbs ensemble," Mol. Phys. 62, 701-719 (1987).

31K. S. Schweizer and J. G. Curro, "Integral equation theories of the structure, thermodynamics, and phase transitions of polymer fluids," Adv. Chem. Phys. 98, 1 (1997).

32 J. P. Hansen and I. R. McDonald, Theory of Simple Liquids (Elsevier, 2013).

33M. Doi and S. F. Edwards, The Theory of Polymer Dynamics (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1988).

34M. Dinpajooh and M. G. Guenza, "On the density dependence of the Integral Equation Coarse-Graining effective potential," J.

15

Phys. Chem. B 122, 3426-3440 (2018).

35M. Dinpajooh and M. G. Guenza, "Can pure polymer liquids be represented at two different resolutions simultaneously?" J. Chem. Phys. 151, 61102 (2019).

36 A. Clark, J. McCarty, and M. Guenza, "Comment on 'System- atic and simulation-free coarse graining of homopolymer melts: A structure-based study' [J. Chem. Phys. 142, 054905 (2015)]," J. Chem. Phys. 143, 067101 (2015).

37 J. McCarty, A. J. Clark, J. Copperman, and M. G. Guenza, "An analytical coarse-graining method which preserves the free energy, structural correlations, and thermodynamic state of poly- mer melts from the atomistic to the mesoscale," J. Chem. Phys. 140, 204913 (2014).

38 A. J. Clark, J. McCarty, I. Y. Lyubimov, and M. G. Guenza, "Thermodynamic consistency in variable-level coarse graining of polymeric liquids," Phy. Rev. Lett. 109, 168301 (2012).

39M. Laso, H. C. Öttinger, and U. W. Suter, "Bond-length and bond-angle distributions in coarse-grained polymer chains," J. Chem. Phys. 95, 2178-2182 (1991).

40 A. Clark, J. McCarty, and M. G. Guenza, "Effective potentials for representing polymers in melts as chains of interacting soft particles," J. Chem. Phys. 139, 124906 (2013).

41 J. P. Donley, J. G. Curro, and J. D. McCoy, "A density func- tional theory for pair correlation functions in molecular liquids," J. Chem. Phys. 101, 3205-3215 (1994).

42V. Krakoviack, J. P. Hansen, and A. A. Louis, "Relating monomer to centre-of-mass distribution functions in polymer so- lutions," Europhys. Lett. 58, 53 (2002).

43 J. P. Hansen, G. M. Torrie, and P. Vieillefosse, "Statistical me- chanics of dense ionized matter. VII. Equation of state and phase separation of ionic mixtures in a uniform background," Phys. Rev. A 16, 2153-2168 (Appendix A) (1977).

44L. Verlet and D. Levesque, "On the theory of classical fluids II," Physica 28, 1124-1142 (Appendix B) (1962).

45T. L. Hill, Statistical Mechanics: Principles and Selected Appli- cations (Dover, New York, 1987).

46S. Plimpton, "Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics," J. Comp. Phys. 117, 1-19 (1995).

47I. Y. Lyubimov, J. McCarty, A. Clark, and M. G. Guenza, "An- alytical rescaling of polymer dynamics from mesoscale simula- tions," J. Chem. Phys. 132 (2010), 10.1063/1.3450301.

48E. J. Sambriski and M. G. Guenza, "Theoretical coarse-graining

approach to bridge length scales in diblock copolymer liquids," Phys. Rev. E 76, 051801 (2007).

49G. Yatsenko, E. J. Sambriski, M. A. Nemirovskaya, and M. Guenza, "Analytical soft-core potentials for macromolecular fluids and mixtures," Phy. Rev. Lett. 93, 2578031-5 (2004). 50G. Yatsenko, E. Sambriski, and M. Guenza, "Coarse-grained description of polymer blends as interacting soft-colloidal parti- cles," J. Chem. Phys. 122 (2005), 10.1063/1.1835271.51W. Li, C. Burkhart, P. Polińska, V. Harmandaris,

M. Doxastakis, “Backmapping coarse-grained and

macro-

molecules: An efficient and versatile machine learn- ing approach," The Journal of Chemical Physics 153, 041101 (2020), https://pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp/article- pdf/doi/10.1063/5.0012320/14719810/041101_1_online.pdf. 52T. J. Boerner, S. Deems, T. R. Furlani, S. L. Knuth, and J. Towns, "Access: Advancing innovation: Nsf's advanced cy- berinfrastructure coordination ecosystem: Services & support," in Practice and Experience in Advanced Research Computing, PEARC '23 (Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2023) p. 173-176.

arXiv:2311.15481v3 [cond-mat.soft] 29 Nov 2023

Supplemental Material to the manuscript entitled: Chemical Potential of a Flexible Polymer Liquid in a Coarse-Grained Representation

M. Dinpajooh, 1,2 J. Millis,3 J. P. Donley,4 and M. G. Guenza1, 3, 4,5, a) 1) Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA 2) Present address: Physical and Computational Sciences Directorate, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, WA, 99352 USA 3) Department of Physics, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA 4) Material Science Institute, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA 5) Institute for Fundamental Science, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA## I. METHODS: MOLECULAR DYNAMICS SIMULATIONS AT ATOMISTIC RESOLUTION, USED TO TEST THE COARSE-GRAINED DESCRIPTION



At atomistic resolution, we performed MD simulations in the canonical NVT ensemble with periodic boundary con- ditions in the three dimensions, using a Nosé-Hoover ther- mostat, and a standard velocity-Verlet integrator. We used the Large-Scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Sim- ulator (LAMMPS) software package,1 with the TraPPE-UA forcefield2, where the hydrogen atoms that are bonded to a carbon are lumped into one united atom. TABLE S1: United atom TraPPE force field used in Atomistic Molecular Dynamics simulations



|Bond potential: Ubond = kb (l - lo)2|||
|---|---|---|
|CH2 - CH2|kokcal mol-1 Å-2 450|lo, Å 1.54|
|Angle potential: Uangle = ko(0 - 00)2|||
|CH2 - CH2 - CH2|kekcalmol 1rad-2 62.1|00, deg 114|
|Dihedral potential: Udih = i=1 2 -3 Ci (1 + e; cos (ip))|||
|CH2 - CH2 - CH2 - CH2|Ci, kcalmol-1|ei|
|i=1|1.4110|+|
|i=2|-0.2708|-|
|i=3|3.1430|+|
|Non-bonded potential: ULJ = 4€[(a/r)12 - (a/r)6]|||
|CH2 - - - CH2|E, kcal mol-1 0.0912|o, Å 3.95|


We assumed a Lennard-Jones potential for the interaction between united atoms that belong to different polymers and between united atoms that are more than three atoms apart in the same polymer. Bonds and angles fluctuate follow- ing harmonic potentials. United atoms that are connected by a dihedral angle interact via a OPLS type potential.2 More details on the potential are presented in Table S1. We as- sumed a cut-off distance of 14 Å, where both the potential and the force were required to go smoothly to zero at the cutoff distance by multiplying the potential by the Mei-Davenport-

a) Electronic mail: mguenza@uoregon.edu

Fernando (MDF) taper function.3 In all simulations the poly- mer chains were randomly generated, and overlapping config- urations were slowly pushed apart by a soft repulsive poten- tial. After switching on gradually the full non-bonded poten- tial, each system was equilibrated for 200 ns and then the pro- duction runs were performed for about 300 ns with a timestep of 2 fs. More details on this procedure can be found in our previous publications.4-6

## II. THE NUMERICAL PROCEDURE TO CALCULATE THE IECG POTENTIAL



The intermolecular IECG potential depends on two param- eters, the monomer-monomer direct correlation function at k -> 0, co, and the polymer mean-square end-to-end distance, < R2 >.

The polymer end-to-end distance enters the definition of the intramolecular distributions, Ômm (k), f2bm (k), and Öbb (k), which enter the equation for the IECG potential, Uoff (r), through hbb (r) and cob(r). The end-to-end distance is a static property that one can conveniently calculate from a properly equilibrated simulation. For long chains in melts, the end-to- end distance follows the scaling law of unperturbed chains. This is represented in Figure S1 where < R2 > from com- puter simulations follows < R2 >x N. Note that the quality of the potential depends on the smoothness of the intramolec- ular distributions, which requires coarse-graining of a chain fragment longer than the polymer persistence length. Note also that if the intramolecular pair distributions do not follow Gaussian statistics, one can still apply the definition of the po- tential by using as the input parameters to the model the full intramolecular distributions, which can be directly computed from atomistic simulations.

At fixed thermodynamic conditions, Figure S1 shows that the distance follows the statistical properties of polymers in theta conditions, scaling with the degrees of polymerization as < R2 >= a' +b' N, as expected. This implies that the end-to- end distance is a parameter that can be conveniently calculated from atomistic simulations of shorter chains and extrapolated to long chains, with minimal computational requirements.

The second parameter that enters the equation of the in- teraction potential is the direct correlation function between monomers, c0. This parameter is calculated from the virial pressure in the high-density approximation, P = PchkBT(1- pNco/2). In this case as well, the computational require-

20000

-10

-15000

co (Å3 -15

-20

*

-10000 ~

<R‘>,Å2

5000

-25

-30

200

400

N

600

800

FIG. S1: Transferability of the IECG method: the values of c0 (black stars) and average square end-to-end distance, < R2 > (blue squares) computed from atomistic simulations of polymer melts of various degree of polymerization N,at T = 503 K and a density of p = 766 kg/m3. The (blue triangles) are values at large N extrapolated from short chain simulations. The end-to-end distance takes a much longer time to equilibrate than the pressure. Data are fitted using the equations c0 = a + b/N and < R2 >= a' + b' N. The values for a, b, a' and b' are -7.3041, -583.45, -145.82, and 19.945 respectively.

ments are minimal because the pressure converges rapidly in the atomistic simulations. Thus, to fully define the parameters for the IECG model we need only a few nanoseconds-long MD trajectories (less than 3ns for the longest chains simu- lated here N = 720). An empirical equation defines the N dependence of c0, as shown in Figure S1, which scales with N as c0 = a + b/N.

The values of < R2 > and c0 follow well-defined equa- tions, where the adjustable parameters (a, a', b, and b') are defined by fitting the equations with data from atomistic sim- ulations. Note that because the equations that define the val- ues of the two parameters are known, it is not necessary to perform atomistic simulations for each degree of polymeriza- tion of interest, but only for enough values of N to determine the parameters of the analytical equations with accuracy. This implies that the IECG model can be used to perform simula- tions for systems that cannot be directly simulated at atomistic resolution. Thus, the IECG potential is transferable and can be used to simulate systems with other degrees of polymeriza- tion.

## III. TESTING THE MCCCS-CG SIMULATIONS AGAINST THE LAMMPS ATOMISTIC SIMULATIONS



To test the precision of the MCCCS-CG procedure in con- structing and equilibrating the polymeric matrix, while using the IECG representation, we verify that the structure (radial distribution functions) and the equation of state (virial pres- sure) are predicted to be consistent with the related atomistic simulations. To perform these tests we use the trajectories from the LAMMPS atomistic MD simulations, performed at the identical thermodynamics and molecular conditions (see

S2

details in Section I. The consistency observed between the MD and MC simulations ensures that the MCCCS-CG code is numerically correct, and that the equilibration moves that we adopted are sufficient in type and number to create a well- equilibrated polymeric liquid at the given conditions. As an example, Figure S2 shows a comparison between the radial distribution function, g(r), of the equilibrated liquid matrix obtained from the MCCCS-CG code, and the radial distribu- tion function of the corresponding atomistic Molecular Dy- namics simulation with the data were mapped onto the coarse- grained representation. The agreement between atomistic and coarse-grained MCCCS-CG structure is quantitative, within the precision of the atomistic simulation data.

1

N=96

0.8

E 50

0.6 ₺

IECG Simulation Atomistic Simulation IECG theory

0.4 0

10 20 30

40

1

N=44

0.8}{

E

0.6

0.4 H

0 10

20

30

r (Å)

FIG. S2: Radial distribution functions for PE with N = 44 and N96, T = 503 K and p = 744 kg/m3. The black line represents the IECG theory, the red squares are from simulated CG soft spheres and the blue circles represent the atomistic simulation with error bars that were calculated from block averages.

Figure S3 shows a test of the pressure from the simulated MCCCS-CG IECG system with variable coarse-grained reso- lution, in comparison with the resulting average pressure from the atomistic MD simulation. The agreement is quantitative, with small differences in the value of the pressure obtained for the coarse-grained model for CG units that contain each more than 30 PE monomers. The sample with 30 PE monomers in one blob shows the limitation of the model because, even if the value of the pressure is still within the numerical error of the atomistic simulation, it starts to diverge from the average atomistic value. This mild disagreement is just an indication that the analytical IECG model, which uses the MSA approx- imation, needs to be treated with care when the number of monomers in one CG site is small.

While Figures S2 and S3 show some examples of these tests, all the data reported in this publication were tested and were found to fulfill these requirements.

The consistency of the IECG virial pressure with the atom- istic simulations (see Section III) implies consistency in the

600

400

200

P (atm)

0

-200

-400℃

10

20

30

40

S3

- - Extrapolated equation using co

O Analytical solution Verlet: MSA closure Numerical solution Verlet: HNC closure IECG MC simulation: soft sphere :unselected: :unselected: O :unselected:

100

:selected:

IECG MC simulation: 3 blobs representation

75

50

Excess Chemical Potential (kcal/mol)

time (ns)

0.08

atomistic simulation

=

1

0.06

0.068

50

n=2

25

no=3

Probability

0.04

0.0676

n =4

196 198

0.02

n=6 nb = 10

-0 --

0 0

0

-400 -200

0

200

P (atm)

400

600 800

FIG. S3: Top panel: The instantaneous pressure, in black, and the running average pressure, in red, is shown for an atomistic system of PE with N = 300, T = 473.17 K and p = 766 kg/m3. Bottom panel: The normalized distribution of the atomistic pressure, the black curve, from the same simulation as the top panel. The average atomistic pressure is shown as a blue vertical line. The average pressure of the same system with different resolutions of CG from the MCCCS-CG code can be seen as vertical red, purple, green, yellow, cyan and orange lines.

- O

50

100

150 200

N

250

300

FIG. S4: Excess chemical potential for a melt of PE in the coarse-grained representation at temperature T = 503 K and two different monomer densities: p = 766 (top line) and 744 kg/m3 (bottom line). Data from coarse-grained MCCCS-CG simulations with nb = 1 (red circles o), and the same with nb = 3 (solid blue triangles A) are shown. Theory predictions for nb = 1 from the numerical solution of the HNC expression, (black squares 1), and the analytical MSA solution, (green circles o) are also shown, but they are obscured by the simulation data points, being essentially identical in value. The black dashed line (- - - ) is the MSA prediction that uses the fit for c0 in the short-chain limit, extrapolated to long chains. :unselected:

physical properties that can be calculated directly from the virial pressure, such as the excess chemical potential. In our previous paper, we presented preliminary calculations of the excess free energy using thermodynamic integration of the pressure.7 In this study, we use the Widom insertion method and Monte Carlo (MC) simulations to directly calculate the excess chemical potential for polymer melts, taking advantage of the IECG description.

100

--

Excess Chemical Potential (kcal/mol)

## IV. EFFECT OF DENSITY AND TEMPERATURE ON THE EXCESS CHEMICAL POTENTIAL OF LONG POLYMER CHAINS



Figure S4 shows the excess chemical potential at increas- ing degree of polymerization but for two different densities, p = 766 and 744 kg/m3. As can be seen, an increase in density amplifies the relevance of the repulsive energetic con- tributions. Consequently, the slope of the excess chemical potential as a function of degree of polymerization becomes more pronounced at higher densities. As for the data in the Main text, the difference between the simulated excess chem- ical potential for nb = 1 and 3 is of smaller magnitude than the size of the symbols in the figure, which is the inherent error in the data.

Figure S5 shows data that similarly illustrates how the ex- cess chemical potential increases as the simulation temper- ature is lowered. Notably, the steeper surge in per ubb occurs at the lower temperature, where the insertion of progressively longer chains results in more pronounced chain superposition, accompanied by heightened repulsive interactions.

50}

-O

O- :selected:

1

0

0

100

200

300

N

FIG. S5: Excess chemical potential for a melt of PE at a density of 766 kg/m3 and three different temperatures. From top to bottom, T = 473, 503, and 513 K. The meaning of the symbols and lines are the same as for S4.

1S. Plimpton, "Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics," J. Comp. Phys. 117, 1-19 (1995).

2M. G. Martin and J. I. Siepmann, "Calculating Gibbs free energies of trans- fer from Gibbs ensemble Monte Carlo simulations," Theoretical Chemistry Accounts: Theory, Computation, and Modeling (Theoretica Chimica Acta) 99, 347-350 (1998).

3J. Mei, J. W. Davenport, and G. W. Fernando, "Analytic embedded-atom potentials for fcc metals: Application to liquid and solid copper," Phys. Rev. B 43, 4653-4658 (1991).

4M. Dinpajooh and M. G. Guenza, "On the density dependence of the Inte- gral Equation Coarse-Graining effective potential," J. Phys. Chem. B 122,

## 3426-3440 (2018).



5M. Dinpajooh and M. G. Guenza, "Coarse-graining simulation approaches for polymer melts: The effect of potential range on computational effi- ciency," Soft Matter 14, 7126-7144 (2018). 6M. G. Guenza, M. Dinpajooh, J. McCarty, and I. Y. Lyubimov, "Accu- racy, transferability, and efficiency of coarse-grained models of molecular

S4

liquids," J. Phys. Chem. B 122, 10257-10278 (2018).

7J. McCarty, A. J. Clark, J. Copperman, and M. G. Guenza, "An analytical coarse-graining method which preserves the free energy, structural correla- tions, and thermodynamic state of polymer melts from the atomistic to the mesoscale," J. Chem. Phys. 140, 204913 (2014).

