arXiv:1908.09194v2 [gr-qc] 19 Dec 2019

The Polymer representation for the scalar field: A Wigner functional approach

Jasel Berra-Montiel1,2 1 Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Autónoma de San Luis Potosí Campus Pedregal, Av. Parque Chapultepec 1610, Col. Privadas del Pedregal, San Luis Potosí, SLP, 78217, Mexico 2 Dual CP Institute of High Energy Physics, Mexico

E-mail: jasel. berra@uaslp.mx

Abstract.

In this paper, we analyze the polymer representation of the real-valued scalar field theory within the deformation quantization formalism. Specifically, we obtain the polymer Wigner functional by taking the limit of Gaussian measures in the Schrödinger representation. The limiting functional corresponds to the polymer representation derived by using algebraic methods such as the GNS construction, and the Fock quantization procedure.

Keywords: Polymer quantum mechanics, Deformation quantization, Loop Quantum Gravity

PACS numbers: 03.70+k, 04.60.Pp, 03.65.Db

One of the main open problems in fundamental physics is related to study the behaviour of quantum fields in a completely background-independet manner. The term backgroun- independent, broadly means that a theory requires to be only defined on a manifold endowed with no geometrical and metric structure. A notable examples of this situation stand out the early stages of the universe, the structure of the space-time at short distances and black holes evaporation. According to Loop Quantum Gravity (LQG) [1],[2],[3], a background-independent and non-perturbative approach based on quantum geometry, in order to obtain an appropiate description it is necessary to quantize in a compatible way both gravity and matter fields. In particular, for a real- valued scalar field such quantization was developed in [4], and it is known as polymer quantization. This polymer representation is obtained by enforcing, at the quantum mechanical level, the diffeomorphism covariance through the unitary implementation of diffeomorphisms by applying non-regular representation techniques. As a consequence, the non-regularity conditions result in a representation which is not equivalent to the standard Schrödinger quantization, and when applied to minisuperspace models

The Polymer representation for the scalar field: A Wigner functional approach

2

leads to a polymer-type representation known as loop quantum cosmology (LQC). Under this approach, several advances in the quantum gravity framework have been achieved, including microscopic states for black hole entropy [5],[6],[7], the avoidance of classical singularities by quantum bounces [8], [9], and the analysis of inhomogeneus perturbations in the cosmic expansion [10] (and references therein). Nonetheless, despite such significant efforts, fresh insights are needed in order to address major physical problems such as, a proper recovery of Einstein dynamics in the semiclassical limit, the fate of singularities in the full LQG and not only on symmetry reduced models, as well as a more suitable comprehension of the dynamics resulting from diffeomorphism invariant states [11].

In order to shed some light on these important issues, we propose to analyze the LQG program within the deformation quantization formalism. Deformation quantization, also refered as phase space quantum mechanics by many authors, consists of an alternative quantization procedure based on the idea that a quantum system is obtained by deforming the algebraic and geometrical structures of the classical phase space [12],[13]. One crucial element within this formulation lies on the definition of the Wigner function. This function corresponds to a quasi-probability distribution and is given by the phase space representation of the density matrix, which encodes the entire information about autocorrelation properties, expectation values and transition amplitudes. In other words, the Wigner function consists on the closest thing we have to a probability distribution in the quantum phase space. Despite the deformation quantization formalism undoubtedly have provided important contributions to several areas in pure mathematics, and also it has proved to be a reliable technique in the understanding of many physical quantum systems [14], the application of the formalism to contemporary problems of quantum gravity is poorly developed. Thus, one motivation of our work is to try to fill this gap.

Following some ideas developed in [15],[16], the aim of this paper is to construct the Wigner functional corresponding to the polymer representation of the real-valued massive scalar field. As we will demostrate below, the polymer Wigner distribution is obtained as a limit, in the functional picture, of the Schrödinger representation with a Gaussian quantum weighted measure. The results presented here, to the best of our knowledge, are new and could pave the way in order to address key physical problems in LQG from a different perspective, since, according to recent developments on the perturbative formulations of algebraic quantum field theory, it has become clear that the star product and Wigner functions provide a valuable tool to formulate quantum field theories (QFT) in the semiclassical regime. Thereby, this current work corresponds to an ongoing progress.

The paper is organized as follows, in section 2 we review the Wigner function associated to the polymer representation of quantum mechanics. In section 3 we derive the Wigner-Weyl quantization scheme for the real massive scalar field within a quantum Gaussian weighted measure, and then define the corresponding Wigner functional. In section 4 the polymer Wigner distribution is obtained as a functional limit measure.

